The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Adventures of Ferdinand Count Fathom — Complete
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Adventures of Ferdinand Count Fathom — Complete

Author: T. Smollett

Release date: September 9, 2004 [eBook #6761]
                Most recently updated: October 30, 2022

Language: English

Credits: Tapio Riikonen and David Widger


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ADVENTURES OF FERDINAND COUNT FATHOM — COMPLETE ***




The Adventures of Ferdinand Count Fathom

by Tobias Smollett


Titlepage

Frontispiece of Part One

COMPLETE IN TWO PARTS

With the Author’s Preface, and an Introduction by G. H. Maynadier, Ph.D.
Department of English, Harvard University.




CONTENTS

 INTRODUCTION

 PART I.
 TO DOCTOR
 CHAPTER ONE. Some sage Observations that naturally introduce our important History
 CHAPTER TWO. A superficial View of our Hero’s Infancy
 CHAPTER THREE. He is initiated in a Military Life, and has the good Fortune to acquire a generous Patron
 CHAPTER FOUR. His Mother’s Prowess and Death; together with some Instances of his own Sagacity
 CHAPTER FIVE. A brief Detail of his Education
 CHAPTER SIX. He meditates Schemes of Importance
 CHAPTER SEVEN. Engages in Partnership with a female Associate, in order to put his Talents in Action
 CHAPTER EIGHT. Their first Attempt; with a Digression which some Readers may think impertinent
 CHAPTER NINE. The Confederates change their Battery, and achieve a remarkable Adventure
 CHAPTER TEN. They proceed to levy Contributions with great Success, until our Hero sets out with the young Count for Vienna, where he enters into League with another Adventurer
 CHAPTER ELEVEN. Fathom makes various Efforts in the World of Gallantry
 CHAPTER TWELVE. He effects a Lodgment in the House of a rich Jeweller
 CHAPTER THIRTEEN. He is exposed to a most perilous Incident in the Course of his Intrigue with the Daughter
 CHAPTER FOURTEEN. He is reduced to a dreadful Dilemma, in consequence of an Assignation with the Wife
 CHAPTER FIFTEEN. But at length succeeds in his Attempt upon both
 CHAPTER SIXTEEN. His Success begets a blind Security, by which he is once again well-nigh entrapped in his Dulcinea’s Apartment
 CHAPTER SEVENTEEN. The Step-dame’s Suspicions being awakened, she lays a Snare for our Adventurer, from which he is delivered by the Interposition of his Good Genius
 CHAPTER EIGHTEEN. Our Hero departs from Vienna, and quits the Domain of Venus for the rough Field of Mars
 CHAPTER NINETEEN. He puts himself under the Guidance of his Associate, and stumbles upon the French Camp, where he finishes his Military Career
 CHAPTER TWENTY. He prepares a Stratagem, but finds himself countermined—Proceeds on his Journey, and is overtaken by a terrible Tempest
 CHAPTER TWENTY-ONE. He falls upon Scylla, seeking to avoid Charybdis.
 CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO. He arrives at Paris, and is pleased with his Reception
 CHAPTER TWENTY-THREE. Acquits himself with Address in a Nocturnal Riot
 CHAPTER TWENTY-FOUR. He overlooks the Advances of his Friends, and smarts severely for his Neglect
 CHAPTER TWENTY-FIVE. He bears his Fate like a Philosopher; and contracts acquaintance with a very remarkable Personage
 CHAPTER TWENTY-SIX. The History of the Noble Castilian
 CHAPTER TWENTY-SEVEN. A flagrant Instance of Fathom’s Virtue, in the Manner of his Retreat to England
 CHAPTER TWENTY-EIGHT. Some Account of his Fellow-Travellers
 CHAPTER TWENTY-NINE. Another providential Deliverance from the Effects of the Smuggler’s ingenious Conjecture
 CHAPTER THIRTY. The singular Manner of Fathom’s Attack and Triumph over the Virtue of the fair Elenor
 CHAPTER THIRTY-ONE. He by accident encounters his old Friend, with whom he holds a Conference, and renews a Treaty
 CHAPTER THIRTY-TWO. He appears in the great World with universal Applause and Admiration
 CHAPTER THIRTY-THREE. He attracts the Envy and Ill Offices of the minor Knights of his own Order, over whom he obtains a complete Victory
 CHAPTER THIRTY-FOUR. He attracts the Envy and Ill Offices of the minor Knights of his own Order, over whom he obtains a complete Victory
 CHAPTER THIRTY-FIVE. He repairs to Bristol Spring, where he reigns paramount during the whole Season
 CHAPTER THIRTY-SIX. He repairs to Bristol Spring, where he reigns paramount during the whole Season
 CHAPTER THIRTY-SEVEN. He repairs to Bristol Spring, where he reigns paramount during the whole Season
 CHAPTER THIRTY-EIGHT. The Biter is Bit

 PART II.
 CHAPTER THIRTY-NINE. Our Adventurer is made acquainted with a new Scene of Life
 CHAPTER FORTY. He contemplates Majesty and its Satellites in Eclipse
 CHAPTER FORTY-ONE. One Quarrel is compromised, and another decided by unusual Arms
 CHAPTER FORTY-TWO. An unexpected Rencontre, and a happy Revolution in the Affairs of our Adventurer
 CHAPTER FORTY-THREE. Fathom justifies the Proverb, “What’s bred in the Bone will never come out of the Flesh”
 CHAPTER FORTY-FOUR. Fathom justifies the Proverb, “What’s bred in the Bone will never come out of the Flesh”
 CHAPTER FORTY-FIVE. Renaldo’s Distress deepens, and Fathom’s Plot thickens
 CHAPTER FORTY-SIX. Our Adventurer becomes absolute in his Power over the Passions of his Friend, and effects one half of his Aim
 CHAPTER FORTY-SEVEN. The Art of Borrowing further explained, and an Account of a Strange Phenomenon
 CHAPTER FORTY-EIGHT. Count Fathom unmasks his Battery; is repulsed; and varies his Operations without effect
 CHAPTER FORTY-NINE. Monimia’s Honour is protected by the Interposition of Heaven
 CHAPTER FIFTY. Fathom shifts the Scene, and appears in a new Character
 CHAPTER FIFTY-ONE. Triumphs over a Medical Rival
 CHAPTER FIFTY-TWO. Repairs to the Metropolis, and enrols himself among the Sons of Paean
 CHAPTER FIFTY-THREE. Acquires Employment in consequence of a lucky Miscarriage
 CHAPTER FIFTY-FOUR. His Eclipse, and gradual Declination
 CHAPTER FIFTY-FIVE. After divers unsuccessful Efforts, he has recourse to the Matrimonial Noose
 CHAPTER FIFTY-SIX. In which his Fortune is effectually strangled
 CHAPTER FIFTY-SEVEN. Fathom being safely housed, the Reader is entertained with a Retrospect
 CHAPTER FIFTY-EIGHT. Renaldo abridges the Proceedings at Law, and approves himself the Son of his Father
 CHAPTER FIFTY-NINE. He is the Messenger of Happiness to his Sister, who removes the film which had long obstructed his Penetration, with regard to Count Fathom
 CHAPTER SIXTY. He recompenses the Attachment of his Friend; and receives a Letter that reduces him to the Verge of Death and Distraction
 CHAPTER SIXTY-ONE. Renaldo meets with a living Monument of Justice, and encounters a Personage of some Note in these Memoirs
 CHAPTER SIXTY-TWO. His Return to England, and Midnight Pilgrimage to Monimia’s Tomb
 CHAPTER SIXTY-THREE. He renews the Rites of Sorrow, and is entranced
 CHAPTER SIXTY-FOUR. The Mystery unfolded—Another Recognition, which, it is to be hoped, the Reader could not foresee
 CHAPTER SIXTY-FIVE. A retrospective Link, necessary for the Concatenation of these Memoirs
 CHAPTER SIXTY-SIX. The History draws near a Period
 CHAPTER SIXTY-SEVEN. The Longest and the Last




ILLUSTRATIONS



 Titlepage of Part One
 Frontispiece of Part One
 He Opened the Repository
 Titlepage of Part Two
 Frontispiece of Part Two
 You Are the Count de Melvil




INTRODUCTION


The Adventures of Ferdinand Count Fathom, Smollett’s third novel, was
given to the world in 1753. Lady Mary Wortley Montagu, writing to her
daughter, the Countess of Bute, over a year later [January 1st, 1755],
remarked that “my friend Smollett . . . has certainly a talent for
invention, though I think it flags a little in his last work.” Lady
Mary was both right and wrong. The inventive power which we commonly
think of as Smollett’s was the ability to work over his own experience
into realistic fiction. Of this, Ferdinand Count Fathom shows
comparatively little. It shows relatively little, too, of Smollett’s
vigorous personality, which in his earlier works was present to give
life and interest to almost every chapter, were it to describe a street
brawl, a ludicrous situation, a whimsical character, or with venomous
prejudice to gibbet some enemy. This individuality—the peculiar spirit
of the author which can be felt rather than described—is present in the
dedication of Fathom to Doctor ———, who is no other than Smollett
himself, and a candid revelation of his character, by the way, this
dedication contains. It is present, too, in the opening chapters, which
show, likewise, in the picture of Fathom’s mother, something of the
author’s peculiar “talent for invention.” Subsequently, however, there
is no denying that the Smollett invention and the Smollett spirit both
flag. And yet, in a way, Fathom displays more invention than any of the
author’s novels; it is based far less than any other on personal
experience. Unfortunately such thorough-going invention was not suited
to Smollett’s genius. The result is, that while uninteresting as a
novel of contemporary manners, Fathom has an interest of its own in
that it reveals a new side of its author. We think of Smollett,
generally, as a rambling storyteller, a rational, unromantic man of the
world, who fills his pages with his own oddly-metamorphosed
acquaintances and experiences. The Smollett of Count Fathom, on the
contrary, is rather a forerunner of the romantic school, who has
created a tolerably organic tale of adventure out of his own brain.
Though this is notably less readable than the author’s earlier works,
still the wonder is that when the man is so far “off his beat,” he
should yet know so well how to meet the strange conditions which
confront him. To one whose idea of Smollett’s genius is formed entirely
by Random and Pickle and Humphry Clinker, Ferdinand Count Fathom will
offer many surprises.

The first of these is the comparative lifelessness of the book. True,
here again are action and incident galore, but generally unaccompanied
by that rough Georgian hurly-burly, common in Smollett, which is so
interesting to contemplate from a comfortable distance, and which goes
so far towards making his fiction seem real. Nor are the characters,
for the most part, life-like enough to be interesting. There is an
apparent exception, to be sure, in the hero’s mother, already
mentioned, the hardened camp-follower, whom we confidently expect to
become vitalised after the savage fashion of Smollett’s characters.
But, alas! we have no chance to learn the lady’s style of conversation,
for the few words that come from her lips are but partially
characteristic; we have only too little chance to learn her manners and
customs. In the fourth chapter, while she is making sure with her
dagger that all those on the field of battle whom she wishes to rifle
are really dead, an officer of the hussars, who has been watching her
lucrative progress, unfeelingly puts a brace of bullets into the lady’s
brain, just as she raises her hand to smite him to the heart. Perhaps
it is as well that she is thus removed before our disappointment at the
non-fulfilment of her promise becomes poignant. So far as we may judge
from the other personages of Count Fathom, even this interesting Amazon
would sooner or later have turned into a wooden figure, with a label
giving the necessary information as to her character.

Such certainly is her son, Fathom, the hero of the book. Because he is
placarded, “Shrewd villain of monstrous inhumanity,” we are fain to
accept him for what his creator intended; but seldom in word or deed is
he a convincingly real villain. His friend and foil, the noble young
Count de Melvil, is no more alive than he; and equally wooden are
Joshua, the high-minded, saint-like Jew, and that tedious, foolish Don
Diego. Neither is the heroine alive, the peerless Monimia, but then, in
her case, want of vitality is not surprising; the presence of it would
amaze us. If she were a woman throbbing with life, she would be
different from Smollett’s other heroines. The “second lady” of the
melodrama, Mademoiselle de Melvil, though by no means vivified, is yet
more real than her sister-in-law.

The fact that they are mostly inanimate figures is not the only
surprise given us by the personages of Count Fathom. It is a surprise
to find few of them strikingly whimsical; it is a surprise to find them
in some cases far more distinctly conceived than any of the people in
Roderick Random or Peregrine Pickle. In the second of these, we saw
Smollett beginning to understand the use of incident to indicate
consistent development of character. In Count Fathom, he seems fully to
understand this principle of art, though he has not learned to apply it
successfully. And so, in spite of an excellent conception, Fathom, as I
have said, is unreal. After all his villainies, which he perpetrates
without any apparent qualms of conscience, it is incredible that he
should honestly repent of his crimes. We are much inclined to doubt
when we read that “his vice and ambition was now quite mortified within
him,” the subsequent testimony of Matthew Bramble, Esq., in Humphry
Clinker, to the contrary, notwithstanding. Yet Fathom up to this point
is consistently drawn, and drawn for a purpose:—to show that
cold-blooded roguery, though successful for a while, will come to grief
in the end. To heighten the effect of his scoundrel, Smollett develops
parallel with him the virtuous Count de Melvil. The author’s scheme of
thus using one character as the foil of another, though not conspicuous
for its originality, shows a decided advance in the theory of
constructive technique. Only, as I have said, Smollett’s execution is
now defective.

“But,” one will naturally ask, “if Fathom lacks the amusing, and not
infrequently stimulating, hurly-burly of Smollett’s former novels; if
its characters, though well-conceived, are seldom divertingly fantastic
and never thoroughly animate; what makes the book interesting?” The
surprise will be greater than ever when the answer is given that, to a
large extent, the plot makes Fathom interesting. Yes, Smollett,
hitherto indifferent to structure, has here written a story in which
the plot itself, often clumsy though it may be, engages a reader’s
attention. One actually wants to know whether the young Count is ever
going to receive consolation for his sorrows and inflict justice on his
basely ungrateful pensioner. And when, finally, all turns out as it
should, one is amazed to find how many of the people in the book have
helped towards the designed conclusion. Not all of them, indeed, nor
all of the adventures, are indispensable, but it is manifest at the end
that much, which, for the time, most readers think irrelevant—such as
Don Diego’s history—is, after all, essential.

It has already been said that in Count Fathom Smollett appears to some
extent as a romanticist, and this is another fact which lends interest
to the book. That he had a powerful imagination is not a surprise. Any
one versed in Smollett has already seen it in the remarkable situations
which he has put before us in his earlier works. These do not indicate,
however, that Smollett possessed the imagination which could excite
romantic interest; for in Roderick Random and in Peregrine Pickle, the
wonderful situations serve chiefly to amuse. In Fathom, however, there
are some designed to excite horror; and one, at least, is eminently
successful. The hero’s night in the wood between Bar-le-duc and Chalons
was no doubt more blood-curdling to our eighteenth-century ancestors
than it is to us, who have become acquainted with scores of similar
situations in the small number of exciting romances which belong to
literature, and in the greater number which do not. Still, even to-day,
a reader, with his taste jaded by trashy novels, will be conscious of
Smollett’s power, and of several thrills, likewise, as he reads about
Fathom’s experience in the loft in which the beldame locks him to pass
the night.

This situation is melodramatic rather than romantic, as the word is
used technically in application to eighteenth and nineteenth-century
literature. There is no little in Fathom, however, which is genuinely
romantic in the latter sense. Such is the imprisonment of the Countess
in the castle-tower, whence she waves her handkerchief to the young
Count, her son and would-be rescuer. And especially so is the scene in
the church, when Renaldo (the very name is romantic) visits at midnight
the supposed grave of his lady-love. While he was waiting for the
sexton to open the door, his “soul . . . was wound up to the highest
pitch of enthusiastic sorrow. The uncommon darkness, . . . the solemn
silence, and lonely situation of the place, conspired with the occasion
of his coming, and the dismal images of his fancy, to produce a real
rapture of gloomy expectation, which the whole world could not have
persuaded him to disappoint. The clock struck twelve, the owl screeched
from the ruined battlement, the door was opened by the sexton, who, by
the light of a glimmering taper, conducted the despairing lover to a
dreary aisle, and stamped upon the ground with his foot, saying, ‘Here
the young lady lies interred.’”

We have here such an amount of the usual romantic machinery of the
“grave-yard” school of poets—that school of which Professor W. L.
Phelps calls Young, in his Night Thoughts, the most “conspicuous
exemplar”—that one is at first inclined to think Smollett poking fun at
it. The context, however, seems to prove that he was perfectly serious.
It is interesting, then, as well as surprising, to find traces of the
romantic spirit in his fiction over ten years before Walpole’s Castle
of Otranto. It is also interesting to find so much melodramatic feeling
in him, because it makes stronger the connection between him and his
nineteenth-century disciple, Dickens.

From all that I have said, it must not be thought that the usual
Smollett is always, or almost always, absent from Count Fathom. I have
spoken of the dedication and of the opening chapters as what we might
expect from his pen. There are, besides, true Smollett strokes in the
scenes in the prison from which Melvil rescues Fathom, and there is a
good deal of the satirical Smollett fun in the description of Fathom’s
ups and downs, first as the petted beau, and then as the fashionable
doctor. In chronicling the latter meteoric career, Smollett had already
observed the peculiarity of his countrymen which Thackeray was fond of
harping on in the next century—“the maxim which universally prevails
among the English people . . . to overlook, . . . on their return to
the metropolis, all the connexions they may have chanced to acquire
during their residence at any of the medical wells. And this social
disposition is so scrupulously maintained, that two persons who live in
the most intimate correspondence at Bath or Tunbridge, shall, in
four-and-twenty hours . . . meet in St. James’s Park, without betraying
the least token of recognition.” And good, too, is the way in which, as
Dr. Fathom goes rapidly down the social hill, he makes excuses for his
declining splendour. His chariot was overturned “with a hideous crash”
at such danger to himself, “that he did not believe he should ever
hazard himself again in any sort of wheel carriage.” He turned off his
men for maids, because “men servants are generally impudent, lazy,
debauched, or dishonest.” To avoid the din of the street, he shifted
his lodgings into a quiet, obscure court. And so forth and so on, in
the true Smollett vein.

But, after all, such of the old sparks are struck only occasionally.
Apart from its plot, which not a few nineteenth-century writers of
detective-stories might have improved, The Adventures of Ferdinand
Count Fathom is less interesting for itself than any other piece of
fiction from Smollett’s pen. For a student of Smollett, however, it is
highly interesting as showing the author’s romantic, melodramatic
tendencies, and the growth of his constructive technique.

G. H. MAYNADIER




THE ADVENTURES OF FERDINAND COUNT FATHOM




TO DOCTOR ———


You and I, my good friend, have often deliberated on the difficulty of
writing such a dedication as might gratify the self-complacency of a
patron, without exposing the author to the ridicule or censure of the
public; and I think we generally agreed that the task was altogether
impracticable.—Indeed, this was one of the few subjects on which we
have always thought in the same manner. For, notwithstanding that
deference and regard which we mutually pay to each other, certain it
is, we have often differed, according to the predominancy of those
different passions, which frequently warp the opinion, and perplex the
understanding of the most judicious.

In dedication, as in poetry, there is no medium; for, if any one of the
human virtues be omitted in the enumeration of the patron’s good
qualities, the whole address is construed into an affront, and the
writer has the mortification to find his praise prostituted to very
little purpose.

On the other hand, should he yield to the transports of gratitude or
affection, which is always apt to exaggerate, and produce no more than
the genuine effusions of his heart, the world will make no allowance
for the warmth of his passion, but ascribe the praise he bestows to
interested views and sordid adulation.

Sometimes too, dazzled by the tinsel of a character which he has no
opportunity to investigate, he pours forth the homage of his admiration
upon some false Maecenas, whose future conduct gives the lie to his
eulogium, and involves him in shame and confusion of face. Such was the
fate of a late ingenious author [the Author of the “Seasons”], who was
so often put to the blush for the undeserved incense he had offered in
the heat of an enthusiastic disposition, misled by popular applause,
that he had resolved to retract, in his last will, all the encomiums
which he had thus prematurely bestowed, and stigmatise the unworthy by
name—a laudable scheme of poetical justice, the execution of which was
fatally prevented by untimely death.

Whatever may have been the fate of other dedicators, I, for my own
part, sit down to write this address, without any apprehension of
disgrace or disappointment; because I know you are too well convinced
of my affection and sincerity to repine at what I shall say touching
your character and conduct. And you will do me the justice to believe,
that this public distinction is a testimony of my particular friendship
and esteem.

Not that I am either insensible of your infirmities, or disposed to
conceal them from the notice of mankind. There are certain foibles
which can only be cured by shame and mortification; and whether or not
yours be of that species, I shall have the comfort to think my best
endeavours were used for your reformation.

Know then, I can despise your pride, while I honour your integrity, and
applaud your taste, while I am shocked at your ostentation.—I have
known you trifling, superficial, and obstinate in dispute; meanly
jealous and awkwardly reserved; rash and haughty in your resentments;
and coarse and lowly in your connexions. I have blushed at the weakness
of your conversation, and trembled at the errors of your conduct—yet,
as I own you possess certain good qualities, which overbalance these
defects, and distinguish you on this occasion as a person for whom I
have the most perfect attachment and esteem, you have no cause to
complain of the indelicacy with which your faults are reprehended. And
as they are chiefly the excesses of a sanguine disposition and
looseness of thought, impatient of caution or control, you may, thus
stimulated, watch over your own intemperance and infirmity with
redoubled vigilance and consideration, and for the future profit by the
severity of my reproof.

These, however, are not the only motives that induce me to trouble you
with this public application. I must not only perform my duty to my
friends, but also discharge the debt I owe to my own interest. We live
in a censorious age; and an author cannot take too much precaution to
anticipate the prejudice, misapprehension, and temerity of malice,
ignorance, and presumption.

I therefore think it incumbent upon me to give some previous intimation
of the plan which I have executed in the subsequent performance, that I
may not be condemned upon partial evidence; and to whom can I with more
propriety appeal in my explanation than to you, who are so well
acquainted with all the sentiments and emotions of my breast?

A novel is a large diffused picture, comprehending the characters of
life, disposed in different groups, and exhibited in various attitudes,
for the purposes of an uniform plan, and general occurrence, to which
every individual figure is subservient. But this plan cannot be
executed with propriety, probability, or success, without a principal
personage to attract the attention, unite the incidents, unwind the
clue of the labyrinth, and at last close the scene, by virtue of his
own importance.

Almost all the heroes of this kind, who have hitherto succeeded on the
English stage, are characters of transcendent worth, conducted through
the vicissitudes of fortune, to that goal of happiness, which ever
ought to be the repose of extraordinary desert.—Yet the same principle
by which we rejoice at the remuneration of merit, will teach us to
relish the disgrace and discomfiture of vice, which is always an
example of extensive use and influence, because it leaves a deep
impression of terror upon the minds of those who were not confirmed in
the pursuit of morality and virtue, and, while the balance wavers,
enables the right scale to preponderate.

In the drama, which is a more limited field of invention, the chief
personage is often the object of our detestation and abhorrence; and we
are as well pleased to see the wicked schemes of a Richard blasted, and
the perfidy of a Maskwell exposed, as to behold a Bevil happy, and an
Edward victorious.

The impulses of fear, which is the most violent and interesting of all
the passions, remain longer than any other upon the memory; and for one
that is allured to virtue, by the contemplation of that peace and
happiness which it bestows, a hundred are deterred from the practice of
vice, by that infamy and punishment to which it is liable, from the
laws and regulations of mankind.

Let me not, therefore, be condemned for having chosen my principal
character from the purlieus of treachery and fraud, when I declare my
purpose is to set him up as a beacon for the benefit of the
unexperienced and unwary, who, from the perusal of these memoirs, may
learn to avoid the manifold snares with which they are continually
surrounded in the paths of life; while those who hesitate on the brink
of iniquity may be terrified from plunging into that irremediable gulf,
by surveying the deplorable fate of Ferdinand Count Fathom.

That the mind might not be fatigued, nor the imagination disgusted, by
a succession of vicious objects, I have endeavoured to refresh the
attention with occasional incidents of a different nature; and raised
up a virtuous character, in opposition to the adventurer, with a view
to amuse the fancy, engage the affection, and form a striking contrast
which might heighten the expression, and give a relief to the moral of
the whole.

If I have not succeeded in my endeavours to unfold the mysteries of
fraud, to instruct the ignorant, and entertain the vacant; if I have
failed in my attempts to subject folly to ridicule, and vice to
indignation; to rouse the spirit of mirth, wake the soul of compassion,
and touch the secret springs that move the heart; I have, at least,
adorned virtue with honour and applause, branded iniquity with reproach
and shame, and carefully avoided every hint or expression which could
give umbrage to the most delicate reader—circumstances which (whatever
may be my fate with the public) will with you always operate in favour
of,

Dear sir, your very affectionate friend and servant,

THE AUTHOR.




CHAPTER ONE

SOME SAGE OBSERVATIONS THAT NATURALLY INTRODUCE OUR IMPORTANT HISTORY.


Cardinal de Retz very judiciously observes, that all historians must of
necessity be subject to mistakes, in explaining the motives of those
actions they record, unless they derive their intelligence from the
candid confession of the person whose character they represent; and
that, of consequence, every man of importance ought to write his own
memoirs, provided he has honesty enough to tell the truth, without
suppressing any circumstance that may tend to the information of the
reader. This, however, is a requisite that, I am afraid, would be very
rarely found among the number of those who exhibit their own portraits
to the public. Indeed, I will venture to say, that, how upright soever
a man’s intentions may be, he will, in the performance of such a task,
be sometimes misled by his own phantasy, and represent objects, as they
appeared to him, through the mists of prejudice and passion.

An unconcerned reader, when he peruses the history of two competitors,
who lived two thousand years ago, or who perhaps never had existence,
except in the imagination of the author, cannot help interesting
himself in the dispute, and espousing one side of the contest, with all
the zeal of a warm adherent. What wonder, then, that we should be
heated in our own concerns, review our actions with the same
self-approbation that they had formerly acquired, and recommend them to
the world with all the enthusiasm of paternal affection?

Supposing this to be the case, it was lucky for the cause of historical
truth, that so many pens have been drawn by writers, who could not be
suspected of such partiality; and that many great personages, among the
ancients as well as moderns, either would not or could not entertain
the public with their own memoirs. From this want of inclination or
capacity to write, in our hero himself, the undertaking is now left to
me, of transmitting to posterity the remarkable adventures of FERDINAND
COUNT FATHOM; and by the time the reader shall have glanced over the
subsequent sheets, I doubt not but he will bless God that the
adventurer was not his own historian.

This mirror of modern chivalry was none of those who owe their dignity
to the circumstances of their birth, and are consecrated from the
cradle for the purposes of greatness, merely because they are the
accidental children of wealth. He was heir to no visible patrimony,
unless we reckon a robust constitution, a tolerable appearance, and an
uncommon capacity, as the advantages of inheritance. If the comparison
obtains in this point of consideration, he was as much as any man
indebted to his parent; and pity it was, that, in the sequel of his
fortune, he never had an opportunity of manifesting his filial
gratitude and regard. From this agreeable act of duty to his sire, and
all those tendernesses that are reciprocally enjoyed betwixt the father
and the son, he was unhappily excluded by a small circumstance; at
which, however, he was never heard to repine. In short, had he been
brought forth in the fabulous ages of the world, the nature of his
origin might have turned to his account; he might, like other heroes of
antiquity, have laid claim to divine extraction, without running the
risk of being claimed by an earthly father. Not that his parents had
any reason to disown or renounce their offspring, or that there was
anything preternatural in the circumstances of his generation and
birth; on the contrary, he was, from the beginning, a child of
promising parts, and in due course of nature ushered into the world
amidst a whole cloud of witnesses. But, that he was acknowledged by no
mortal sire, solely proceeded from the uncertainty of his mother, whose
affections were so dissipated among a number of admirers, that she
could never pitch upon the person from whose loins our hero sprung.

Over and above this important doubt under which he was begotten, other
particularities attended his birth, and seemed to mark him out as
something uncommon among the sons of men. He was brought forth in a
waggon, and might be said to be literally a native of two different
countries; for, though he first saw the light in Holland, he was not
born till after the carriage arrived in Flanders; so that, all these
extraordinary circumstances considered, the task of determining to what
government he naturally owed allegiance, would be at least as difficult
as that of ascertaining the so much contested birthplace of Homer.

Certain it is, the Count’s mother was an Englishwoman, who, after
having been five times a widow in one campaign, was, in the last year
of the renowned Marlborough’s command, numbered among the baggage of
the allied army, which she still accompanied, through pure benevolence
of spirit, supplying the ranks with the refreshing streams of choice
Geneva, and accommodating individuals with clean linen, as the
emergency of their occasions required. Nor was her philanthropy
altogether confined to such ministration; she abounded with “the milk
of human kindness,” which flowed plentifully among her
fellow-creatures; and to every son of Mars who cultivated her favour,
she liberally dispensed her smiles, in order to sweeten the toils and
dangers of the field.

And here it will not be amiss to anticipate the remarks of the reader,
who, in the chastity and excellency of his conception, may possibly
exclaim, “Good Heaven! will these authors never reform their
imaginations, and lift their ideas from the obscene objects of low
life? Must the public be again disgusted with the grovelling adventures
of a waggon? Will no writer of genius draw his pen in the vindication
of taste, and entertain us with the agreeable characters, the dignified
conversation, the poignant repartee, in short, the genteel comedy of
the polite world?”

Have a little patience, gentle, delicate, sublime critic; you, I doubt
not, are one of those consummate connoisseurs, who, in their
purifications, let humour evaporate, while they endeavour to preserve
decorum, and polish wit, until the edge of it is quite worn off. Or,
perhaps, of that class, who, in the sapience of taste, are disgusted
with those very flavours in the productions of their own country which
have yielded infinite delectation to their faculties, when imported
from another clime; and d—n an author in despite of all precedent and
prescription;—who extol the writings of Petronius Arbiter, read with
rapture the amorous sallies of Ovid’s pen, and chuckle over the story
of Lucian’s ass; yet, if a modern author presumes to relate the
progress of a simple intrigue, are shocked at the indecency and
immorality of the scene;—who delight in following Guzman d’Alfarache,
through all the mazes of squalid beggary; who with pleasure accompany
Don Quixote and his squire, in the lowest paths of fortune; who are
diverted with the adventures of Scarron’s ragged troop of strollers,
and highly entertained with the servile situations of Gil Blas; yet,
when a character in humble life occasionally occurs in a performance of
our own growth, exclaim, with an air of disgust, “Was ever anything so
mean! sure, this writer must have been very conversant with the lowest
scenes of life;”—who, when Swift or Pope represents a coxcomb in the
act of swearing, scruple not to laugh at the ridiculous execrations;
but, in a less reputed author, condemn the use of such profane
expletives;—who eagerly explore the jakes of Rabelais, for amusement,
and even extract humour from the dean’s description of a lady’s
dressing-room; yet in a production of these days, unstamped with such
venerable names, will stop their noses, with all the signs of loathing
and abhorrence, at a bare mention of the china chamber-pot;—who
applauded Catullus, Juvenal, Persius, and Lucan, for their spirit in
lashing the greatest names of antiquity; yet, when a British satirist,
of this generation, has courage enough to call in question the talents
of a pseudo-patron in power, accuse him of insolence, rancour, and
scurrility.

If such you be, courteous reader, I say again, have a little patience;
for your entertainment we are about to write. Our hero shall, with all
convenient despatch, be gradually sublimed into those splendid
connexions of which you are enamoured; and God forbid, that, in the
meantime, the nature of his extraction should turn to his prejudice in
a land of freedom like this, where individuals are every day ennobled
in consequence of their own qualifications, without the least
retrospective regard to the rank or merit of their ancestors. Yes,
refined reader, we are hastening to that goal of perfection, where
satire dares not show her face; where nature is castigated, almost even
to still life; where humour turns changeling, and slavers in an insipid
grin; where wit is volatilised into a mere vapour; where decency,
divested of all substance, hovers about like a fantastic shadow; where
the salt of genius, escaping, leaves nothing but pure and simple
phlegm; and the inoffensive pen for ever drops the mild manna of
soul-sweetening praise.




CHAPTER TWO

A SUPERFICIAL VIEW OF OUR HERO’S INFANCY.


Having thus bespoken the indulgence of our guests, let us now produce
the particulars of our entertainment, and speedily conduct our
adventurer through the stage of infancy, which seldom teems with
interesting incidents.

As the occupations of his mother would not conveniently permit her to
suckle this her firstborn at her own breast, and those happy ages were
now no more, in which the charge of nursing a child might be left to
the next goat or she-wolf, she resolved to improve upon the ordinances
of nature, and foster him with a juice much more energetic than the
milk of goat, wolf, or woman; this was no other than that delicious
nectar, which, as we have already hinted, she so cordially distributed
from a small cask that hung before her, depending from her shoulders by
a leathern zone. Thus determined, ere he was yet twelve days old, she
enclosed him in a canvas knapsack, which being adjusted to her neck,
fell down upon her back, and balanced the cargo that rested on her
bosom.

There are not wanting those who affirm, that, while her double charge
was carried about in this situation, her keg was furnished with a long
and slender flexible tube, which, when the child began to be clamorous,
she conveyed into his mouth, and straight he stilled himself with
sucking; but this we consider as an extravagant assertion of those who
mix the marvellous in all their narrations, because we cannot conceive
how the tender organs of an infant could digest such a fiery beverage,
which never fails to discompose the constitutions of the most hardy and
robust. We therefore conclude that the use of this potation was more
restrained, and that it was with simple element diluted into a
composition adapted to his taste and years. Be this as it will, he
certainly was indulged in the use of it to such a degree as would have
effectually obstructed his future fortune, had not he been happily
cloyed with the repetition of the same fare, for which he conceived the
utmost detestation and abhorrence, rejecting it with loathing and
disgust, like those choice spirits, who, having been crammed with
religion in their childhood, renounce it in their youth, among other
absurd prejudices of education.

While he was thus dangled in a state of suspension, a German trooper
was transiently smit with the charms of his mother, who listened to his
honourable addresses, and once more received the silken bonds of
matrimony; the ceremony having been performed as usual at the
drum-head. The lady had no sooner taken possession of her new name,
than she bestowed it upon her son, who was thenceforward distinguished
by the appellation of Ferdinand de Fadom; nor was the husband offended
at this presumption in his wife, which he not only considered as a
proof of her affection and esteem, but also as a compliment, by which
he might in time acquire the credit of being the real father of such a
hopeful child.

Notwithstanding this new engagement with a foreigner, our hero’s mother
still exercised the virtues of her calling among the English troops, so
much was she biassed by that laudable partiality, which, as Horace
observes, the natale solum generally inspires. Indeed this inclination
was enforced by another reason, that did not fail to influence her
conduct in this particular; all her knowledge of the High Dutch
language consisted in some words of traffic absolutely necessary for
the practice of hex vocation, together with sundry oaths and terms of
reproach, that kept her customers in awe; so that, except among her own
countrymen, she could not indulge that propensity to conversation, for
which she had been remarkable from her earliest years. Nor did this
instance of her affection fail of turning to her account in the sequel.
She was promoted to the office of cook to a regimental mess of
officers; and, before the peace of Utrecht, was actually in possession
of a suttling-tent, pitched for the accommodation of the gentlemen in
the army.

Meanwhile, Ferdinand improved apace in the accomplishments of infancy;
his beauty was conspicuous, and his vigour so uncommon, that he was
with justice likened unto Hercules in the cradle. The friends of his
father-in-law dandled him on their knees, while he played with their
whiskers, and, before he was thirteen months old, taught him to suck
brandy impregnated with gunpowder, through the touch-hole of a pistol.
At the same time, he was caressed by divers serjeants of the British
army, who severally and in secret contemplated his qualifications with
a father’s pride, excited by the artful declaration with which the
mother had flattered each apart.

Soon as the war was (for her unhappily) concluded, she, as in duty
bound, followed her husband into Bohemia; and his regiment being sent
into garrison at Prague, she opened a cabaret in that city, which was
frequented by a good many guests of the Scotch and Irish nations, who
were devoted to the exercise of arms in the service of the Emperor. It
was by this communication that the English tongue became vernacular to
young Ferdinand, who, without such opportunity, would have been a
stranger to the language of his forefathers, in spite of all his
mother’s loquacity and elocution; though it must be owned, for the
credit of her maternal care, that she let slip no occasion of making it
familiar to his ear and conception; for, even at those intervals in
which she could find no person to carry on the altercation, she used to
hold forth in earnest soliloquies upon the subject of her own
situation, giving vent to many opprobrious invectives against her
husband’s country, between which and Old England she drew many odious
comparisons; and prayed, without ceasing, that Europe might speedily be
involved in a general war, so as that she might have some chance of
re-enjoying the pleasures and emoluments of a Flanders campaign.




CHAPTER THREE

HE IS INITIATED IN A MILITARY LIFE, AND HAS THE GOOD FORTUNE TO ACQUIRE
A GENEROUS PATRON.


While she wearied Heaven with these petitions, the flame of war broke
out betwixt the houses of Ottoman and Austria, and the Emperor sent
forth an army into Hungary, under the auspices of the renowned Prince
Eugene. On account of this expedition, the mother of our hero gave up
housekeeping, and cheerfully followed her customers and husband into
the field; having first provided herself with store of those
commodities in which she had formerly merchandised. Although the hope
of profit might in some measure affect her determination, one of the
chief motives for her visiting the frontiers of Turkey, was the desire
of initiating her son in the rudiments of his education, which she now
thought high time to inculcate, he being, at this period, in the sixth
year of his age; he was accordingly conducted to the camp, which she
considered as the most consummate school of life, and proposed for the
scene of his instruction; and in this academy he had not continued many
weeks, when he was an eye-witness of that famous victory, which, with
sixty thousand men, the Imperial general obtained over an army of one
hundred and fifty thousand Turks.

His father-in-law was engaged, and his mother would not be idle on this
occasion. She was a perfect mistress of all the camp qualifications,
and thought it a duty incumbent on her to contribute all that lay in
her power towards distressing the enemy. With these sentiments she
hovered about the skirts of the army, and the troops were no sooner
employed in the pursuit, than she began to traverse the field of battle
with a poignard and a bag, in order to consult her own interest, annoy
the foe, and exercise her humanity at the same time. In short, she had,
with amazing prowess, delivered some fifty or threescore disabled
Mussulmen of the pain under which they groaned, and made a comfortable
booty of the spoils of the slain, when her eyes were attracted by the
rich attire of an Imperial officer, who lay bleeding on the plain, to
all appearance in the agonies of death.

She could not in her heart refuse that favour to a friend and Christian
she had so compassionately bestowed upon so many enemies and infidels,
and therefore drew near with the sovereign remedy, which she had
already administered with such success. As she approached this
deplorable object of pity, her ears were surprised with an ejaculation
in the English tongue, which he fervently pronounced, though with a
weak and languid voice, recommending his soul to God, and his family to
the protection of Heaven. Our Amazon’s purpose was staggered by this
providential incident; the sound of her native language, so
unexpectedly heard, and so pathetically delivered, had a surprising
effect upon her imagination; and the faculty of reflection did not
forsake her in such emergency. Though she could not recollect the
features of this unhappy officer, she concluded, from his appearance,
that he was some person of distinction in the service, and foresaw
greater advantage to herself in attempting to preserve his life, than
she could possibly reap from the execution of her first resolve. “If,”
said she to herself, “I can find means of conveying him to his tent
alive, he cannot but in conscience acknowledge my humanity with some
considerable recompense; and, should he chance to survive his wounds, I
have everything to expect from his gratitude and power.”

Fraught with these prudential suggestions, she drew near the
unfortunate stranger, and, in a softened accent of pity and condolence,
questioned him concerning his name, condition, and the nature of his
mischance, at the same time making a gentle tender of her service.
Agreeably surprised to hear himself accosted in such a manner, by a
person whose equipage seemed to promise far other designs, he thanked
her in the most grateful terms for her humanity, with the appellation
of kind countrywoman; gave her to understand that he was colonel of a
regiment of horse; that he had fallen in consequence of a shot he
received in his breast at the beginning of the action; and, finally,
entreated her to procure some carriage on which he might be removed to
his tent. Perceiving him faint and exhausted with loss of blood, she
raised up his head, and treated him with that cordial which was her
constant companion. At that instant, espying a small body of hussars
returning to the camp with the plunder they had taken, she invoked
their assistance, and they forthwith carried the officer to his own
quarters, where his wound was dressed, and his preserver carefully
tended him until his recovery was completed.

In return for these good offices, this gentleman, who was originally of
Scotland, rewarded her for the present with great liberality, assured
her of his influence in promoting her husband, and took upon himself
the charge of young Ferdinand’s education; the boy was immediately
taken into his protection, and entered as a trooper in his own
regiment; but his good intentions towards his father-in-law were
frustrated by the death of the German, who, in a few days after this
disposition, was shot in the trenches before Temiswaer.

This event, over and above the conjugal affliction with which it
invaded the lady’s quiet, would have involved her in infinite
difficulty and distress, with regard to her temporal concerns, by
leaving her unprotected in the midst of strangers, had not she been
thus providentially supplied with an effectual patron in the colonel,
who was known by the appellation of Count Melvil. He no sooner saw her,
by the death of her husband, detached from all personal connexions with
a military life, than he proposed that she should quit her occupation
in the camp, and retire to his habitation in the city of Presburg,
where she would be entertained in ease and plenty during the remaining
part of her natural life. With all due acknowledgments of his
generosity, she begged to be excused from embracing his proposal,
alleging she was so much accustomed to her present way of life, and so
much devoted to the service of the soldiery, that she should never be
happy in retirement, while the troops of any prince in Christendom kept
the field.

The Count, finding her determined to prosecute her scheme, repeated his
promise of befriending her upon all occasions; and in the meantime
admitted Ferdinand into the number of his domestics, resolving that he
should be brought up in attendance upon his own son, who was a boy of
the same age. He kept him, however, in his tent, until he should have
an opportunity of revisiting his family in person; and, before that
occasion offered, two whole years elapsed, during which the illustrious
Prince Eugene gained the celebrated battle of Belgrade, and afterwards
made himself master of that important frontier.




CHAPTER FOUR

HIS MOTHER’S PROWESS AND DEATH; TOGETHER WITH SOME INSTANCES OF HIS OWN
SAGACITY.


It would have been impossible for the mother of our adventurer, such as
she hath been described, to sit quietly in her tent, while such an
heroic scene was acting. She was no sooner apprised of the general’s
intention to attack the enemy, than she, as usual, packed up her
moveables in a waggon, which she committed to the care of a peasant in
the neighbourhood, and put herself in motion with the troops; big with
the expectation of re-acting that part in which she had formerly
acquitted herself so much to her advantage.—Nay, she by this time
looked upon her own presence as a certain omen of success to the cause
which she espoused; and, in their march to battle, actually encouraged
the ranks with repeated declarations, importing, that she had been
eye-witness of ten decisive engagements, in all of which her friends
had been victorious, and imputing such uncommon good fortune to some
supernatural quality inherent in her person.

Whether or not this confidence contributed to the fortune of the day,
by inspiring the soldiers to an uncommon pitch of courage and
resolution, I shall not pretend to determine. But, certain it is, the
victory began from that quarter in which she had posted herself; and no
corps in the army behaved with such intrepidity as that which was
manifested by those who were favoured with her admonitions and example;
for she not only exposed her person to the enemy’s fire, with the
indifference and deliberation of a veteran, but she is said to have
achieved a very conspicuous exploit by the prowess of her single arm.
The extremity of the line to which she had attached herself, being
assaulted in flank by a body of the spahis, wheeled about, in order to
sustain the charge, and received them with such a seasonable fire, as
brought a great number of turbans to the ground; among those who fell,
was one of the chiefs or agas, who had advanced before the rest, with a
view to signalise his valour.

Our English Penthesilea no sooner saw this Turkish leader drop, than,
struck with the magnificence of his own and horse’s trappings, she
sprung forward to seize them as her prize, and found the aga not dead,
though in a good measure disabled by his misfortune, which was entirely
owing to the weight of his horse, that, having been killed by a
musket-ball, lay upon his leg, so that he could not disengage himself.
Nevertheless, perceiving the virago approach with fell intent, he
brandished his symitar, and tried to intimidate his assailant with a
most horrible exclamation; but it was not the dismal yell of a
dismounted cavalier, though enforced with a hideous ferocity of
countenance, and the menacing gestures with which he waited her
approach, that could intimidate such an undaunted she-campaigner; she
saw him writhing in the agonies of a situation from which he could not
move; and, running towards him with the nimbleness and intrepidity of a
Camilla, described a semicircle in the progress of her assault, and
attacking him on one side, plunged her well-tried dagger in his throat.
The shades of death encompassed him, his life-blood issued at the
wound, he fell prone upon the earth, he bit the dust, and having thrice
invoked the name of Allah! straight expired.

While his destiny was thus fulfilled, his followers began to reel; they
seemed dismayed at the fate of their chief, beheld their companions
drop like the leaves in autumn, and suddenly halted in the midst of
their career. The Imperialists, observing the confusion of the enemy,
redoubled their fire; and, raising a dreadful shout, advanced in order
to improve the advantage they had gained. The spahis durst not wait the
shock of such an encounter; they wheeled to the right-about, and
clapping spurs to their horses, fled in the utmost disorder. This was
actually the circumstance that turned the scale of battle. The
Austrians pursued their good fortune with uncommon impetuosity, and in
a few minutes left the field clear for the mother of our hero, who was
such an adept in the art of stripping, that in the twinkling of an eye
the bodies of the aga and his Arabian lay naked to the skin. It would
have been happy for her, had she been contented with these
first-fruits, reaped from the fortune of the day, and retired with her
spoils, which were not inconsiderable; but, intoxicated with the glory
she had won, enticed by the glittering caparisons that lay scattered on
the plain, and without doubt prompted by the secret instinct of her
fate, she resolved to seize opportunity by the forelock, and once for
all indemnify herself for the many fatigues, hazards, and sorrows she
had undergone.

Thus determined, she reconnoitred the field, and practised her address
so successfully, that in less than half an hour she was loaded with
ermine and embroidery, and disposed to retreat with her burden, when
her regards were solicited by a splendid bundle, which she descried at
some distance lying on the ground. This was no other than an unhappy
officer of hussars; who, after having the good fortune to take a
Turkish standard, was desperately wounded in the thigh, and obliged to
quit his horse; finding himself in such a helpless condition, he had
wrapped his acquisition round his body, that whatever might happen, he
and his glory should not be parted; and thus shrouded, among the dying
and the dead, he had observed the progress of our heroine, who stalked
about the field, like another Atropos, finishing, wherever she came,
the work of death. He did not at all doubt, that he himself would be
visited in the course of her peregrinations, and therefore provided for
her reception, with a pistol ready cocked in his hand, while he lay
perdue beneath his covert, in all appearance bereft of life. He was not
deceived in his prognostic; she no sooner eyed the golden crescent
than, inflamed with curiosity or cupidity, she directed thitherward her
steps, and discerning the carcase of a man, from which, she thought,
there would be a necessity for disengaging it, she lifted up her
weapon, in order to make sure of her purchase; and in the very instant
of discharging her blow, received a brace of bullets in her brain.

Thus ended the mortal pilgrimage of this modern Amazon; who, in point
of courage, was not inferior to Semiramis, Tomyris, Zenobia,
Thalestris, or any boasted heroine of ancient times. It cannot be
supposed that this catastrophe made a very deep impression upon the
mind of young Ferdinand, who had just then attained the ninth year of
his age, and been for a considerable time weaned from her maternal
caresses; especially as he felt no wants nor grievances in the family
of the Count, who favoured him with a particular share of indulgence,
because he perceived in him a spirit of docility, insinuation, and
sagacity, far above his years. He did not, however, fail to lament the
untimely fate of his mother, with such filial expressions of sorrow, as
still more intimately recommended him to his patron; who, being himself
a man of extraordinary benevolence, looked upon the boy as a prodigy of
natural affection, and foresaw in his future services a fund of
gratitude and attachment, that could not fail to render him a valuable
acquisition to his family.

In his own country, he had often seen connexions of that sort, which
having been planted in the infancy of the adherent, had grown up to a
surprising pitch of fidelity and friendship, that no temptation could
bias, and no danger dissolve. He therefore rejoiced in the hope of
seeing his own son accommodated with such a faithful attendant, in the
person of young Fathom, on whom he resolved to bestow the same
education he had planned for the other, though conveyed in such a
manner as should be suitable to the sphere in which he was ordained to
move. In consequence of these determinations, our young adventurer led
a very easy life, in quality of page to the Count, in whose tent he lay
upon a pallet, close to his field-bed, and often diverted him with his
childish prattle in the English tongue, which the more seldom his
master had occasion to speak, he the more delighted to hear. In the
exercise of his function, the boy was incredibly assiduous and alert;
far from neglecting the little particulars of his duty, and embarking
in the mischievous amusements of the children belonging to the camp, he
was always diligent, sedate, agreeably officious and anticipating; and
in the whole of his behaviour seemed to express the most vigilant sense
of his patron’s goodness and generosity; nay, to such a degree had
these sentiments, in all appearance, operated upon his reflection, that
one morning, while he supposed the Count asleep, he crept softly to his
bedside, and gently kissing his hand, which happened to be uncovered,
pronounced, in a low voice, a most fervent prayer in his behalf,
beseeching Heaven to shower down blessings upon him, as the widow’s
friend and the orphan’s father. This benediction was not lost upon the
Count, who chanced to be awake, and heard it with admiration; but what
riveted Ferdinand in his good graces, was a discovery that our youth
made, while his master was upon duty in the trenches before Belgrade.

Two foot soldiers, standing sentry near the door of the tent, were
captivated with the sight of some valuable moveables belonging to it;
and supposing, in their great wisdom, that the city of Belgrade was too
well fortified to be taken during that campaign, they came to a
resolution of withdrawing themselves from the severe service of the
trenches, by deserting to the enemy, after they should have rifled
Count Melvil’s tent of the furniture by which they were so powerfully
allured. The particulars of this plan were concerted in the French
language, which, they imagined, would screen them from all risk of
being detected, in case they should be overheard, though, as there was
no living creature in sight, they had no reason to believe that any
person was privy to their conversation. Nevertheless, they were
mistaken in both these conjectures. The conference reached the ears of
Fathom, who was at the other end of the tent, and had perceived the
eager looks with which they considered some parts of the furniture. He
had penetration enough to suspect their desire, and, alarmed by that
suspicion, listened attentively to their discourse; which, from a
slender knowledge in the French tongue, he had the good fortune partly
to understand.

This important piece of intelligence he communicated to the Count at
his return, and measures were immediately taken to defeat the design,
and make an example of the authors, who being permitted to load
themselves with the booty, were apprehended in their retreat, and
punished with death according to their demerits.




CHAPTER FIVE

A BRIEF DETAIL OF HIS EDUCATION.


Nothing could have more seasonably happened to confirm the good opinion
which the colonel entertained of Ferdinand’s principles. His intentions
towards the boy grew every day more and more warm; and, immediately
after the peace of Passarowitz, he retired to his own house at
Presburg, and presented young Fathom to his lady, not only as the son
of a person to whom he owed his life, but also as a lad who merited his
peculiar protection and regard by his own personal virtue. The
Countess, who was an Hungarian, received him with great kindness and
affability, and her son was ravished with the prospect of enjoying such
a companion. In short, fortune seemed to have provided for him an
asylum, in which he might be safely trained up, and suitably prepared
for more important scenes of life than any of his ancestors had ever
known.

He was not, in all respects, entertained on the footing of his young
master; yet he shared in all his education and amusements, as one whom
the old gentleman was fully determined to qualify for the station of an
officer in the service; and, if he did not eat with the Count, he was
every day regaled with choice bits from his table; holding, as it were,
a middle place between the rank of a relation and favourite domestic.
Although his patron maintained a tutor in the house, to superintend the
conduct of his heir, he committed the charge of his learning to the
instructions of a public school; where he imagined the boy would imbibe
a laudable spirit of emulation among his fellows, which could not fail
of turning out to the advantage of his education. Ferdinand was entered
in the same academy; and the two lads proceeded equally in the paths of
erudition; a mutual friendship and intimacy soon ensued, and,
notwithstanding the levity and caprice commonly discernible in the
behaviour of such boys, very few or rather no quarrels happened in the
course of their communication. Yet their dispositions were altogether
different, and their talents unlike. Nay, this dissimilarity was the
very bond of their union; because it prevented that jealousy and
rivalship which often interrupts the harmony of two warm
contemporaries.

The young Count made extraordinary progress in the exercises of the
school, though he seemed to take very little pains in the cultivation
of his studies; and became a perfect hero in all the athletic
diversions of his fellow-scholars; but, at the same time, exhibited
such a bashful appearance and uncouth address, that his mother
despaired of ever seeing him improved into any degree of polite
behaviour. On the other hand, Fathom, who was in point of learning a
mere dunce, became, even in his childhood, remarkable among the ladies
for his genteel deportment and vivacity; they admired the proficiency
he made under the directions of his dancing-master, the air with which
he performed his obeisance at his entrance and exit; and were charmed
with the agreeable assurance and lively sallies of his conversation;
while they expressed the utmost concern and disgust at the boorish
demeanour of his companion, whose extorted bows resembled the pawings
of a mule, who hung his head in silence like a detected sheep-stealer,
who sat in company under the most awkward expressions of constraint,
and whose discourse never exceeded the simple monosyllables of negation
and assent.

In vain did all the females of the family propose to him young Fathom,
as a pattern and reproach. He remained unaltered by all their efforts
and expostulations, and allowed our adventurer to enjoy the triumph of
his praise, while he himself was conscious of his own superiority in
those qualifications which seemed of more real importance than the mere
exteriors and forms of life. His present ambition was not to make a
figure at his father’s table, but to eclipse his rivals at school, and
to acquire an influence and authority among these confederates.
Nevertheless, Fathom might possibly have fallen under his displeasure
or contempt, had not that pliant genius found means to retain his
friendship by seasonable compliances and submission; for the sole
study, or at least the chief aim of Ferdinand, was to make himself
necessary and agreeable to those on whom his dependence was placed. His
talent was in this particular suited to his inclination; he seemed to
have inherited it from his mother’s womb; and, without all doubt, would
have raised upon it a most admirable superstructure of fortune and
applause, had not it been inseparably yoked with a most insidious
principle of self-love, that grew up with him from the cradle, and left
no room in his heart for the least particle of social virtue. This
last, however, he knew so well how to counterfeit, by means of a large
share of ductility and dissimulation, that, surely, he was calculated
by nature to dupe even the most cautious, and gratify his appetites, by
levying contributions on all mankind.

So little are the common instructors of youth qualified to judge the
capacities of those who are under their tutelage and care, that Fathom,
by dint of his insinuating arts, made shift to pass upon the
schoolmaster as a lad of quick parts, in despite of a natural
inaptitude to retain his lessons, which all his industry could never
overcome. In order to remedy, or rather to cloak this defect in his
understanding, he had always recourse to the friendship of the young
Count, who freely permitted him to transcribe his exercises, until a
small accident happened, which had well-nigh put a stop to these
instances of his generosity.—The adventure, inconsiderable as it is, we
shall record, as the first overt act of Ferdinand’s true character, as
well as an illustration of the opinion we have advanced touching the
blind and injudicious decisions of a right pedagogue.

Among other tasks imposed by the pedant upon the form to which our two
companions belonged, they were one evening ordered to translate a
chapter of Caesar’s Commentaries. Accordingly the young Count went to
work, and performed the undertaking with great elegance and despatch.
Fathom, having spent the night in more effeminate amusements, was next
morning so much hurried for want of time, that in his transcription he
neglected to insert a few variations from the text, these being the
terms on which he was allowed to use it; so that it was verbatim a copy
of the original. As those exercises were always delivered in a heap,
subscribed with the several names of the boys to whom they belonged,
the schoolmaster chanced to peruse the version of Ferdinand, before he
looked into any of the rest, and could not help bestowing upon it
particular marks of approbation. The next that fell under his
examination was that of the young Count, when he immediately perceived
the sameness, and, far from imputing it to the true cause, upbraided
him with having copied the exercise of our adventurer, and insisted
upon chastising him upon the spot for his want of application.

Had not the young gentleman thought his honour was concerned, he would
have submitted to the punishment without murmuring; but he inherited,
from his parents, the pride of two fierce nations, and, being
overwhelmed with reproaches for that which he imagined ought to have
redounded to his glory, he could not brook the indignity, and boldly
affirmed, that he himself was the original, to whom Ferdinand was
beholden for his performance. The schoolmaster, nettled to find himself
mistaken in his judgment, resolved that the Count should have no cause
to exult in the discovery he had made, and, like a true flogger,
actually whipped him for having allowed Fathom to copy his exercise.
Nay, in the hope of vindicating his own penetration, he took an
opportunity of questioning Ferdinand in private concerning the
circumstances of the translation, and our hero, perceiving his drift,
gave him such artful and ambiguous answers, as persuaded him that the
young Count had acted the part of a plagiary, and that the other had
been restrained from doing himself justice, by the consideration of his
own dependence.

This profound director did not fail, in honour of his own discernment,
to whisper about the misrepresentation, as an instance of the young
Count’s insolence, and Fathom’s humility and good sense. The story was
circulated among the servants, especially the maids belonging to the
family, whose favour our hero had acquired by his engaging behaviour;
and at length it reached the ears of his patron, who, incensed at his
son’s presumption and inhospitality, called him to a severe account,
when the young gentleman absolutely denied the truth of the allegation,
and appealed to the evidence of Fathom himself. Our adventurer was
accordingly summoned by the father, and encouraged to declare the
truth, with an assurance of his constant protection; upon which
Ferdinand very wisely fell upon his knees, and, while the tears gushed
from his eyes, acquitted the young Count of the imputation, and
expressed his apprehension, that the report had been spread by some of
his enemies, who wanted to prejudice him in the opinion of his patron.

The old gentleman was not satisfied of his son’s integrity by this
declaration; being naturally of a generous disposition, highly
prepossessed in favour of the poor orphan, and chagrined at the
unpromising appearance of his heir, he suspected that Fathom was
overawed by the fear of giving offence, and that, notwithstanding what
he had said, the case really stood as it had been represented. In this
persuasion, he earnestly exhorted his son to resist and combat with any
impulse he might feel within himself, tending to selfishness, fraud, or
imposition; to encourage every sentiment of candour and benevolence,
and to behave with moderation and affability to all his
fellow-creatures. He laid upon him strong injunctions, not without a
mixture of threats, to consider Fathom as the object of his peculiar
regard; to respect him as the son of the Count’s preserver, as a
Briton, a stranger, and, above all, an helpless orphan, to whom the
rights of hospitality were doubly due.

Such admonitions were not lost upon the youth, who, under the rough
husk of his personal exhibition, possessed a large share of generous
sensibility. Without any formal professions to his father, he resolved
to govern himself according to his remonstrances; and, far from
conceiving the least spark of animosity against Fathom, he looked upon
the poor boy as the innocent cause of his disgrace, and redoubled his
kindness towards him, that his honour might never again be called in
question, upon the same subject. Nothing is more liable to
misconstruction than an act of uncommon generosity; one half of the
world mistake the motive, from want of ideas to conceive an instance of
beneficence that soars so high above the level of their own sentiments;
and the rest suspect it of something sinister or selfish, from the
suggestions of their own sordid and vicious inclinations. The young
Count subjected himself to such misinterpretation, among those who
observed the increased warmth of civility and complaisance in his
behaviour to Ferdinand. They ascribed it to his desire of still
profiting by our adventurer’s superior talents, by which alone they
supposed him enabled to maintain any degree of reputation at school; or
to the fear of being convicted by him of some misdemeanour of which he
knew himself guilty. These suspicions were not effaced by the conduct
of Ferdinand, who, when examined on the subject, managed his answers in
such a manner, as confirmed their conjectures, while he pretended to
refute them, and at the same time acquired to himself credit for his
extraordinary discretion and self-denial.

If he exhibited such a proof of sagacity in the twelfth year of his
age, what might not be expected from his finesse in the maturity of his
faculties and experience? Thus secured in the good graces of the whole
family, he saw the days of his puerility glide along in the most
agreeable elapse of caresses and amusement. He never fairly plunged
into the stream of school-education, but, by floating on the surface,
imbibed a small tincture of those different sciences which his master
pretended to teach. In short, he resembled those vagrant swallows that
skim along the level of some pool or river, without venturing to wet
one feather in their wings, except in the accidental pursuit of an
inconsiderable fly. Yet, though his capacity or inclination was
unsuited for studies of this kind, he did not fail to manifest a
perfect genius in the acquisition of other more profitable arts. Over
and above the accomplishments of address, for which he hath been
already celebrated, he excelled all his fellows in his dexterity at
fives and billiards; was altogether unrivalled in his skill at draughts
and backgammon; began, even at these years, to understand the moves and
schemes of chess; and made himself a mere adept in the mystery of
cards, which he learned in the course of his assiduities and attention
to the females of the house.




CHAPTER SIX

HE MEDITATES SCHEMES OF IMPORTANCE.


It was in these parties that he attracted the notice and friendship of
his patron’s daughter, a girl by two years older than himself, who was
not insensible to his qualifications, and looked upon him with the most
favourable eyes of prepossession. Whether or not he at this period of
his life began to project plans for availing himself of her
susceptibility, is uncertain; but, without all doubt, he cultivated her
esteem with as obsequious and submissive attention as if he had already
formed the design, which, in his advanced age, he attempted to put in
execution.

Divers circumstances conspired to promote him in the favour of this
young lady; the greenness of his years secured him from any appearance
of fallacious aim; so that he was indulged in frequent opportunities of
conversing with his young mistress, whose parents encouraged this
communication, by which they hoped she would improve in speaking the
language of her father. Such connexions naturally produce intimacy and
friendship. Fathom’s person was agreeable, his talents calculated for
the meridian of those parties, and his manners so engaging, that there
would have been no just subject for wonder, had he made an impression
upon the tender unexperienced heart of Mademoiselle de Melvil, whose
beauty was not so attractive as to extinguish his hope, in raising up a
number of formidable rivals; though her expectations of fortune were
such as commonly lend additional lustre to personal merit.

All these considerations were so many steps towards the success of
Ferdinand’s pretensions; and though he cannot be supposed to have
perceived them at first, he in the sequel seemed perfectly well
apprised of his advantages, and used them to the full extent of his
faculties. Observing that she delighted in music, he betook himself to
the study of that art, and, by dint of application and a tolerable ear,
learned of himself to accompany her with a German flute, while she sung
and played upon the harpsichord. The Count, seeing his inclination, and
the progress he had made, resolved that his capacity should not be lost
for want of cultivation; and accordingly provided him with a master, by
whom he was instructed in the principles of the art, and soon became a
proficient in playing upon the violin.

In the practice of these improvements and avocations, and in attendance
upon his young master, whom he took care never to disoblige or neglect,
he attained to the age of sixteen, without feeling the least abatement
in the friendship and generosity of those upon whom he depended; but,
on the contrary, receiving every day fresh marks of their bounty and
regard. He had before this time been smit with the ambition of making a
conquest of the young lady’s heart, and foresaw manifold advantages to
himself in becoming son-in-law to Count Melvil, who, he never doubted,
would soon be reconciled to the match, if once it could be effectuated
without his knowledge. Although he thought he had great reason to
believe that Mademoiselle looked upon him with an eye of peculiar
favour, his disposition was happily tempered with an ingredient of
caution, that hindered him from acting with precipitation; and he had
discerned in the young lady’s deportment certain indications of
loftiness and pride, which kept him in the utmost vigilance and
circumspection; for he knew, that, by a premature declaration, he
should run the risk of forfeiting all the advantages he had gained, and
blasting those expectations that now blossomed so gaily in his heart.

Restricted by these reflections, he acted at a wary distance, and
determined to proceed by the method of sap, and, summoning all his
artifice and attractions to his aid, employed them under the insidious
cover of profound respect, in order to undermine those bulwarks of
haughtiness or discretion, which otherwise might have rendered his
approaches to her impracticable. With a view to enhance the value of
his company, and sound her sentiments at the same time, he became more
reserved than usual, and seldomer engaged in her parties of music and
cards; yet, in the midst of his reserve, he never failed in those
demonstrations of reverence and regard, which he knew perfectly well
how to express, but devised such excuses for his absence, as she could
not help admitting. In consequence of this affected shyness, she more
than once gently chid him for his neglect and indifference, observing,
with an ironical air, that he was now too much of a man to be
entertained with such effeminate diversions; but her reproofs were
pronounced with too much ease and good-humour to be agreeable to our
hero, who desired to see her ruffled and chagrined at his absence, and
to hear himself rebuked with an angry affectation of disdain. This
effort, therefore, he reinforced with the most captivating carriage he
could assume, in those hours which he now so sparingly bestowed upon
his mistress. He regaled her with all the entertaining stories he could
learn or invent, particularly such as he thought would justify and
recommend the levelling power of love, that knows no distinctions of
fortune. He sung nothing but tender airs and passionate complaints,
composed by desponding or despairing swains; and, to render his
performances of this kind the more pathetic, interlarded them with some
seasonable sighs, while the tears, which he had ever at command, stood
collected in either eye.

It was impossible for her to overlook such studied emotions; she in a
jocose manner taxed him with having lost his heart, rallied the excess
of his passion, and in a merry strain undertook to be an advocate for
his love. Her behaviour was still wide of his wish and expectation. He
thought she would, in consequence of her discovery, have betrayed some
interested symptom; that her face would have undergone some favourable
suffusion; that her tongue would have faltered, her breast heaved, and
her whole deportment betokened internal agitation and disorder, in
which case, he meant to profit by the happy impression, and declare
himself, before she could possibly recollect the dictates of her
pride.—Baffled however in his endeavours, by the serenity of the young
lady, which he still deemed equivocal, he had recourse to another
experiment, by which he believed he should make a discovery of her
sentiments beyond all possibility of doubt. One day, while he
accompanied Mademoiselle in her exercise of music, he pretended all of
a sudden to be taken ill, and counterfeited a swoon in her apartment.
Surprised at this accident, she screamed aloud, but far from running to
his assistance, with the transports and distraction of a lover, she
ordered her maid, who was present, to support his head, and went in
person to call for more help. He was accordingly removed to his own
chamber, where, willing to be still more certified of her inclinations,
he prolonged the farce, and lay groaning under the pretence of a severe
fever.

The whole family was alarmed upon this occasion; for, as we have
already observed, he was an universal favourite. He was immediately
visited by the old Count and his lady, who expressed the utmost concern
at his distemper, ordered him to be carefully attended, and sent for a
physician without loss of time. The young gentleman would scarce stir
from his bedside, where he ministered unto him with all the
demonstrations of brotherly affection; and Miss exhorted him to keep up
his spirits, with many expressions of unreserved sympathy and regard.
Nevertheless, he saw nothing in her behaviour but what might be
naturally expected from common friendship, and a compassionate
disposition, and was very much mortified at his disappointment.

Whether the miscarriage actually affected his constitution, or the
doctor happened to be mistaken in his diagnostics, we shall not pretend
to determine; but the patient was certainly treated secundum artem, and
all his complaints in a little time realised; for the physician, like a
true graduate, had an eye to the apothecary in his prescriptions; and
such was the concern and scrupulous care with which our hero was
attended, that the orders of the faculty were performed with the utmost
punctuality. He was blooded, vomited, purged, and blistered, in the
usual forms (for the physicians of Hungary are generally as well
skilled in the arts of their occupation as any other leeches under the
sun), and swallowed a whole dispensary of bolusses, draughts, and
apozems, by which means he became fairly delirious in three days, and
so untractable, that he could be no longer managed according to rule;
otherwise, in all likelihood, the world would never have enjoyed the
benefit of these adventures. In short, his constitution, though unable
to cope with two such formidable antagonists as the doctor and the
disease he had conjured up, was no sooner rid of the one, than it
easily got the better of the other; and though Ferdinand, after all,
found his grand aim unaccomplished, his malady was productive of a
consequence, which, though he had not foreseen it, he did not fail to
convert to his own use and advantage.




CHAPTER SEVEN

ENGAGES IN PARTNERSHIP WITH A FEMALE ASSOCIATE, IN ORDER TO PUT HIS
TALENTS IN ACTION.


While he displayed his qualifications in order to entrap the heart of
his young mistress, he had unwittingly enslaved the affections of her
maid. This attendant was also a favourite of the young lady, and,
though her senior by two or three good years at least, unquestionably
her superior in point of personal beauty; she moreover possessed a good
stock of cunning and discernment, and was furnished by nature with a
very amorous complexion. These circumstances being premised, the reader
will not be surprised to find her smitten by those uncommon
qualifications which we have celebrated in young Fathom. She had in
good sooth long sighed in secret, under the powerful influence of his
charms, and practised upon him all those little arts, by which a woman
strives to attract the admiration, and ensnare the heart of a man she
loves; but all his faculties were employed upon the plan which he had
already projected; that was the goal of his whole attention, to which
all his measures tended; and whether or not he perceived the impression
he had made upon Teresa, he never gave her the least reason to believe
he was conscious of his victory, until he found himself baffled in his
design upon the heart of her mistress.—She therefore persevered in her
distant attempts to allure him, with the usual coquetries of dress and
address, and, in the sweet hope of profiting by his susceptibility,
made shift to suppress her feelings, and keep her passion within
bounds, until his supposed danger alarmed her fears, and raised such a
tumult within her breast, that she could no longer conceal her love,
but gave a loose to her sorrow in the most immoderate expressions of
anguish and affliction, and, while his delirium lasted, behaved with
all the agitation of a despairing shepherdess.

Ferdinand was, or pretended to be, the last person in the family who
understood the situation of her thoughts; when he perceived her
passion, he entered into deliberation with himself, and tasked his
reflection and foresight, in order to discover how best he might
convert this conquest to his own advantage. Here, then, that we may
neglect no opportunity of doing justice to our hero, it will be proper
to observe, that, howsoever unapt his understanding might be to receive
and retain the usual culture of the schools, he was naturally a genius
self-taught, in point of sagacity and invention.—He dived into the
characters of mankind, with a penetration peculiar to himself, and, had
he been admitted as a pupil in any political academy, would have
certainly become one of the ablest statesmen in Europe.

Having revolved all the probable consequences of such a connexion, he
determined to prosecute an amour with the lady whose affection he had
subdued; because he hoped to interest her as an auxiliary in his grand
scheme upon Mademoiselle, which he did not as yet think proper to lay
aside; for he was not more ambitious in the plan, than indefatigable in
the prosecution of it. He knew it would be impossible to execute his
aims upon the Count’s daughter under the eye of Teresa, whose natural
discernment would be whetted with jealousy, and who would watch his
conduct, and thwart his progress with all the vigilance and spite of a
slighted maiden. On the other hand, he did not doubt of being able to
bring her over to his interest, by the influence he had already gained,
or might afterwards acquire over her passions; in which case, she would
effectually espouse his cause, and employ her good offices with her
mistress in his behalf; besides, he was induced by another motive,
which, though secondary, did not fail in this case to have an effect
upon his determination. He looked upon Teresa with the eyes of
appetite, which he longed to gratify; for he was not at all dead to the
instigations of the flesh, though he had philosophy enough to resist
them, when he thought they interfered with his interest. Here the case
was quite different. His desire happened to be upon the side of his
advantage, and therefore, resolving to indulge it, he no sooner found
himself in a condition to manage such an adventure, than he began to
make gradual advances in point of warmth and particular complacency to
the love-sick maid.

He first of all thanked her, in the most grateful terms, for the
concern she had manifested at his distemper, and the kind services he
had received from her during the course of it; he treated her upon all
occasions with unusual affability and regard, assiduously courted her
acquaintance and conversation, and contracted an intimacy that in a
little time produced a declaration of love. Although her heart was too
much intendered to hold out against all the forms of assault, far from
yielding at discretion, she stood upon honourable terms, with great
obstinacy of punctilio, and, while she owned he was master of her
inclinations, gave him to understand, with a peremptory and resolute
air, that he should never make a conquest of her virtue; observing,
that, if the passion he professed was genuine, he would not scruple to
give such a proof of it as would at once convince her of his sincerity;
and that he could have no just cause to refuse her that satisfaction,
she being his equal in point of birth and situation; for, if he was the
companion and favourite of the young Count, she was the friend and
confidant of Mademoiselle.

He acknowledged the strength of her argument, and that her
condescension was greater than his deserts, but objected against the
proposal, as infinitely prejudicial to the fortunes of them both. He
represented the state of dependence in which they mutually stood; their
utter incapacity to support one another under the consequences of a
precipitate match, clandestinely made, without the consent and
concurrence of their patrons. He displayed, with great eloquence, all
those gay expectations they had reason to entertain, from that eminent
degree of favour which they had already secured in the family; and set
forth, in the most alluring colours, those enchanting scenes of
pleasure they might enjoy in each other, without that disagreeable
consciousness of a nuptial chain, provided she would be his associate
in the execution of a plan which he had projected for their reciprocal
convenience.

Having thus inflamed her love of pleasure and curiosity, he, with great
caution, hinted his design upon the young lady’s fortune, and,
perceiving her listening with the most greedy attention, and perfectly
ripe for the conspiracy, he disclosed his intention at full length,
assuring her, with the most solemn protestations of love and
attachment, that, could he once make himself legal possessor of an
estate which Mademoiselle inherited by the will of a deceased aunt, his
dear Teresa should reap the happy fruits of his affluence, and wholly
engross his time and attention.

Such a base declaration our hero would not have ventured to make, had
he not implicitly believed the damsel was as great a latitudinarian as
himself, in point of morals and principle; and been well assured, that,
though he should be mistaken in her way of thinking, so far as to be
threatened with a detection of his purpose, he would always have it in
his power to refute her accusation as mere calumny, by the character he
had hitherto maintained, and the circumspection of his future conduct.

He seldom or never erred in his observations on the human heart.
Teresa, instead of disapproving, relished the plan in general, with
demonstrations of singular satisfaction. She at once conceived all the
advantageous consequences of such a scheme, and perceived in it only
one flaw, which, however, she did not think incurable. This defect was
no other than a sufficient bond of union, by which they might be
effectually tied down to their mutual interest. She foresaw, that, in
case Ferdinand should obtain possession of the prize, he might, with
great ease, deny their contract, and disavow her claim of
participation. She therefore demanded security, and proposed, as a
preliminary of the agreement, that he should privately take her to
wife, with a view to dispel all her apprehensions of his inconstancy or
deceit, as such a previous engagement would be a check upon his
behaviour, and keep him strictly to the letter of their contract.

He could not help subscribing to the righteousness of this proposal,
which, nevertheless, he would have willingly waived, on the supposition
that they could not possibly be joined in the bands of wedlock with
such secrecy as the nature of the case absolutely required. This would
have been a difficulty soon removed, had the scene of the transaction
been laid in the metropolis of England, where passengers are plied in
the streets by clergymen, who prostitute their characters and
consciences for hire, in defiance of all decency and law; but in the
kingdom of Hungary, ecclesiastics are more scrupulous in the exercise
of their function, and the objection was, or supposed to be, altogether
insurmountable; so that they were fain to have recourse to an
expedient, with which, after some hesitation, our she-adventurer was
satisfied. They joined hands in the sight of Heaven, which they called
to witness, and to judge the sincerity of their vows, and engaged, in a
voluntary oath, to confirm their union by the sanction of the church,
whenever a convenient opportunity for so doing should occur.

The scruples of Teresa being thus removed, she admitted Ferdinand to
the privileges of a husband, which he enjoyed in stolen interviews, and
readily undertook to exert her whole power in promoting his suit with
her young mistress, because she now considered his interest as
inseparably connected with her own. Surely nothing could be more absurd
or preposterous than the articles of this covenant, which she insisted
upon with such inflexibility. How could she suppose that her pretended
lover would be restrained by an oath, when the very occasion of
incurring it was an intention to act in violation of all laws human and
divine? and yet such ridiculous conjuration is commonly the cement of
every conspiracy, how dark, how treacherous, how impious soever it may
be: a certain sign that there are some remains of religion left in the
human mind, even after every moral sentiment hath abandoned it; and
that the most execrable ruffian finds means to quiet the suggestions of
his conscience, by some reversionary hope of Heaven’s forgiveness.




CHAPTER EIGHT

THEIR FIRST ATTEMPT; WITH A DIGRESSION WHICH SOME READERS MAY THINK
IMPERTINENT.


Be this as it will, our lovers, though real voluptuaries, amidst the
first transports of their enjoyment did not neglect the great political
aim of their conjunction. Teresa’s bedchamber, to which our hero
constantly repaired at midnight, was the scene of their deliberations,
and there it was determined that the damsel, in order to avoid
suspicion, should feign herself irritated at the indifference of
Ferdinand, her passion for whom was by this time no secret in the
family; and that, with a view to countenance this affectation, he
should upon all occasions treat her with an air of loftiness and
disdain.

So screened from all imputation of fraud, she was furnished by him with
artful instructions how to sound the inclinations of her young
mistress, how to recommend his person and qualifications by the sure
methods of contradiction, comparisons, revilings, and reproach; how to
watch the paroxysms of her disposition, inflame her passions, and
improve, for his advantage, those moments of frailty from which no
woman is exempted. In short, this consummate politician taught his
agent to poison the young lady’s mind with insidious conversation,
tending to inspire her with the love of guilty pleasure, to debauch her
sentiments, and confound her ideas of dignity and virtue. After all,
the task is not difficult to lead the unpractised heart astray, by dint
of those opportunities her seducer possessed. The seeds of insinuation
seasonably sown upon the warm luxuriant soil of youth, could hardly
fail of shooting up into such intemperate desires as he wanted to
produce, especially when cultured and cherished in her unguarded hours,
by that stimulating discourse which familiarity admits, and the looser
passions, ingrafted in every breast, are apt to relish and excuse.

Fathom had previously reconnoitred the ground, and discovered some
marks of inflammability in Mademoiselle’s constitution; her beauty was
not such as to engage her in those gaieties of amusement which could
flatter her vanity and dissipate her ideas; and she was of an age when
the little loves and young desires take possession of the fancy; he
therefore concluded, that she had the more leisure to indulge these
enticing images of pleasure that youth never fails to create,
particularly in those who, like her, were addicted to solitude and
study.

Teresa, full fraught with the wily injunctions of her confederate, took
the field, and opened the campaign with such remarkable sourness in her
aspect when Ferdinand appeared, that her young lady could not help
taking notice of her affected chagrin, and asked the reason of such
apparent alteration in her way of thinking. Prepared for this question,
the other replied, in a manner calculated for giving Mademoiselle to
understand, that, whatever impressions Ferdinand might have formerly
made on her heart, they were now altogether effaced by the pride and
insolence with which he had received her advances; and that her breast
now glowed with all the revenge of a slighted lover.

To evince the sincerity of this declaration, she bitterly inveighed
against him, and even affected to depreciate those talents, in which
she knew his chief merit to consist; hoping, by these means, to
interest Mademoiselle’s candour in his defence. So far the train
succeeded. That young lady’s love for truth was offended at the
calumnies that were vented against Ferdinand in his absence. She chid
her woman for the rancour of her remarks, and undertook to refute the
articles of his dispraise. Teresa supported her own assertions with
great obstinacy, and a dispute ensued, in which her mistress was heated
into some extravagant commendations of our adventurer.

His supposed enemy did not fail to make a report of her success, and to
magnify every advantage they had gained; believing, in good earnest,
that her lady’s warmth was the effect of a real passion for the
fortunate Mr. Fathom. But he himself viewed the adventure in a
different light, and rightly imputed the violence of Mademoiselle’s
behaviour to the contradiction she had sustained from her maid, or to
the fire of her natural generosity glowing in behalf of innocence
traduced. Nevertheless, he was perfectly well pleased with the nature
of the contest; because, in the course of such debates, he foresaw that
he should become habitually her hero, and that, in time, she would
actually believe those exaggerations of his merit, which she herself
had feigned, for the honour of her own arguments.

This presage, founded upon that principle of self-respect, without
which no individual exists, may certainly be justified by manifold
occurrences in life. We ourselves have known a very pregnant example,
which we shall relate, for the emolument of the reader. A certain needy
author having found means to present a manuscript to one of those sons
of fortune who are dignified with the appellation of patrons, instead
of reaping that applause and advantage with which he had regaled his
fancy, had the mortification to find his performance treated with
infinite irreverence and contempt, and, in high dudgeon and
disappointment, appealed to the judgment of another critic, who, he
knew, had no veneration for the first.

This common consolation, to which all baffled authors have recourse,
was productive of very happy consequences to our bard; for, though the
opinions of both judges concerning the piece were altogether the same,
the latter, either out of compassion to the appellant, or desire of
rendering his rival ridiculous in the eye of taste, undertook to repair
the misfortune, and in this manner executed the plan. In a meeting of
literati, to which both these wits belonged, he who had espoused the
poet’s cause, having previously desired another member to bring his
composition on the carpet, no sooner heard it mentioned, than he began
to censure it with flagrant marks of scorn, and, with an ironical air,
looking at its first condemner, observed, that he must be furiously
infected with the rage of patronising, who could take such a deplorable
performance into his protection. The sarcasm took effect.

The person against whom it was levelled, taking umbrage at his
presumption, assumed an aspect of disdain, and replied with great
animosity, that nothing was more easily supported than the character of
a Zoilus, because no production was altogether free from blemishes; and
any man might pronounce against any piece by the lump, without
interesting his own discernment; but to perceive the beauties of a
work, it was requisite to have learning, judgment, and taste; and
therefore he did not wonder that the gentleman had overlooked a great
many in the composition which he so contemptuously decried. A rejoinder
succeeded this reply, and produced a long train of altercation, in
which the gentleman, who had formerly treated the book with such
disrespect, now professed himself its passionate admirer, and held
forth in praise of it with great warmth and elocution.

Not contented with having exhibited this instance of regard, he next
morning sent a message to the owner, importing, that he had but
superficially glanced over the manuscript, and desiring the favour of
perusing it a second time. Being indulged in this request, he
recommended it in terms of rapture to all his friends and dependants,
and, by dint of unwearied solicitation, procured a very ample
subscription for the author.

But, to resume the thread of our story. Teresa’s practices were not
confined to simple defamation. Her reproaches were contrived so as to
imply some intelligence in favour of the person she reviled. In
exemplifying his pertness and arrogance, she repeated his witty
repartee; on pretence of blaming his ferocity, she recounted proofs of
his spirit and prowess; and, in explaining the source of his vanity,
gave her mistress to understand, that a certain young lady of fashion
was said to be enamoured of his person. Nor did this well-instructed
understrapper omit those other parts of her cue which the principal
judged necessary for the furtherance of his scheme. Her conversation
became less guarded, and took a freer turn than usual; she seized all
opportunities of introducing little amorous stories, the greatest part
of which were invented for the purposes of warming her passions, and
lowering the price of chastity in her esteem; for she represented all
the young lady’s contemporaries in point of age and situation, as so
many sensualists, who, without scruple, indulged themselves in the
stolen pleasures of youth.

Meanwhile, Ferdinand seconded these endeavours with his whole industry
and address. He redoubled, if possible, his deference and respect,
whetting his assiduity to the keenest edge of attention; and, in short,
regulated his dress, conversation, and deportment, according to the
fancy, turn, and prevailing humour of his young mistress. He, moreover,
attempted to profit by her curiosity, which he knew to be truly
feminine; and having culled from the library of his patron certain
dangerous books, calculated to debauch the minds of young people, left
them occasionally upon the table in his apartment, after having
directed Teresa to pick them up, as if by accident, in his absence, and
carry them off for the entertainment of Mademoiselle; nay, this crafty
projector found means to furnish his associate with some mischievous
preparations, which were mingled in her chocolate, tea, or coffee, as
provocations to warm her constitution; yet all these machinations,
ingenious as they were, failed, not only in fulfilling their aim, but
even in shaking the foundations of her virtue or pride, which stood
their assaults unmoved, like a strong tower built upon a rock,
impregnable to all the tempestuous blasts of heaven.

Not but that the conspirators were more than once mistaken in the
effects of their artifices, and disposed to applaud themselves on the
progress they had made. When at any time she expressed a desire to
examine those performances which were laid before her as snares to
entrap her chastity, they attributed that, which was no other than
curiosity, to a looseness of sentiment; and when she discovered no
aversion to hear those anecdotes concerning the frailty of her
neighbours, they imputed to abatement of chastity that satisfaction
which was the result of self-congratulation on her own superior virtue.

So far did the treacherous accomplice of Fathom presume upon these
misconstructions, that she at length divested her tongue of all
restraint, and behaved in such a manner, that the young lady,
confounded and incensed at her indecency and impudence, rebuked her
with great severity, and commanded her to reform her discourse, on pain
of being dismissed with disgrace from her service.




CHAPTER NINE

THE CONFEDERATES CHANGE THEIR BATTERY, AND ACHIEVE A REMARKABLE
ADVENTURE.


Thunderstruck at this disappointment, the confederates held a council,
in order to deliberate upon the next measures that should be taken; and
Ferdinand, for the present, despairing of accomplishing his grand aim,
resolved to profit in another manner, by the conveniency of his
situation. He represented to his helpmate, that it would be prudent for
them to make hay while the sun shone, as their connexion might be
sooner or later discovered, and an end put to all those opportunities
which they now so happily enjoyed. All principles of morality had been
already excluded from their former plan; consequently he found it an
easy task to interest Teresa in any other scheme tending to their
mutual advantage, howsoever wicked and perfidious it might be. He
therefore persuaded her to be his auxiliary in defrauding Mademoiselle
at play, and gave her suitable directions for that purpose; and even
tutored her how to abuse the trust reposed in her, by embezzling the
young lady’s effects, without incurring the suspicion of dishonesty.

On the supposition that every servant in the house was not able to
resist such temptation, the purse of her mistress, to which the maid
had always access, was dropped in a passage which the domestics had
occasion to frequent; and Fathom posted himself in a convenient place,
in order to observe the effect of his stratagem. Here he was not
disappointed in his conjecture. The first person who chanced to pass
that way, was one of the chambermaids, with whom Teresa had lived for
some time in a state of inveterate enmity, because the wench had failed
in that homage and respect which was paid to her by the rest of the
servants.

Ferdinand had, in his heart, espoused the quarrel of his associate, and
longed for an occasion to deliver her from the malicious observance of
such an antagonist. When he, therefore, saw her approach, his heart
throbbed with joyful expectations; but, when she snatched up the purse,
and thrust it in her bosom, with all the eagerness and confusion of one
determined to appropriate the windfall to her own use, his transports
were altogether unspeakable. He traced her to her own apartment,
whither she immediately retreated with great trepidation, and then
communicated the discovery to Teresa, together with instructions how to
behave in the sequel.

In conformity with these lessons, she took the first opportunity of
going to Mademoiselle, and demanding money for some necessary expense,
that the loss might be known before the finder could have leisure to
make any fresh conveyance of the prize; and, in the meantime, Ferdinand
kept a strict eye upon the motions of the chambermaid. The young lady,
having rummaged her pockets in vain, expressed some surprise at the
loss of her purse; upon which her attendant gave indications of extreme
amazement and concern. She said, it could not possibly be lost;
entreated her to search her escritoir, while she herself ran about the
room, prying into every corner, with all the symptoms of fear and
distraction. Having made this unsuccessful inquiry, she pretended to
shed a flood of tears, bewailing her own fate, in being near the person
of any lady who met with such a misfortune, by which, she observed, her
character might be called in question. She produced her own keys, and
begged upon her knees, that her chamber and boxes might be searched
without delay.

In a word, she demeaned herself so artfully upon this occasion, that
her mistress, who never entertained the least doubt of her integrity,
now looked upon her as a miracle of fidelity and attachment, and was at
infinite pains to console her for the accident which had happened;
protesting that, for her own part, the loss of the money should never
affect her with a moment’s uneasiness, if she could retrieve a certain
medal which she had long kept in her purse, as a remembrance of her
deceased aunt, from whom she received it in a present.

Fathom entered accidentally into the midst of this well-acted scene,
and, perceiving the agitation of the maid, and the concern of the
mistress, desired, in a respectful manner, to know the cause of their
disorder. Before the young lady had time to make him acquainted with
the circumstances of the case, his accomplice exclaimed, in an affected
passion, “Mr. Fathom, my lady has lost her purse; and, as no persons in
the family are so much about her as you and I, you must give me leave,
in my own justification, to insist upon Mademoiselle’s ordering the
apartments of us both to be searched without loss of time. Here are my
pockets and my keys, and you cannot scruple to give her the same
satisfaction; for innocence has nothing to fear.”

Miss Melvil reprimanded her sharply for her unmannerly zeal; and
Ferdinand eyeing her with a look of disdain, “Madam,” said he, “I
approve of your proposal; but, before I undergo such mortification, I
would advise Mademoiselle to subject the two chambermaids to such
inquiry; as they also have access to the apartments, and are, I
apprehend, as likely as you or I to behave in such a scandalous
manner.”

The young lady declared that she was too well satisfied of Teresa’s
honesty and Ferdinand’s honour, to harbour the least suspicion of
either, and that she would sooner die than disgrace them so far as to
comply with the proposal the former had made; but as she saw no reason
for exempting the inferior servants from that examination which Fathom
advised, she would forthwith put it in execution. The chambermaids
being accordingly summoned, she calmly asked if either of them had
accidentally found the purse she had dropped? and both replying in the
negative, she assumed an air of severity and determination, and
demanding their keys, threatened to examine their trunks on the
instant.

The guilty Abigail, who, though an Hungarian, was not inferior, in
point of effrontery, to any one of the sisterhood in England, no sooner
heard this menace, than she affected an air of affronted innocence,
thanked God she had lived in many reputable families, and been trusted
with untold gold, but was never before suspected of theft; that the
other maid might do as she should think proper, and be mean-spirited
enough to let her things be tumbled topsy-turvy and exposed; but, for
her own part, if she should be used in that inhuman and disgraceful
manner, she would not stay another hour in the house; and in conclusion
said, that Mademoiselle had more reason to look sharp after those who
enjoyed the greatest share of her favour, than believe their malicious
insinuations against innocent people whom they were well known to hate
and defame.

This declaration, implying an hint to the prejudice of Teresa, far from
diverting Miss Melvil from her purpose, served only to enhance the
character of the accused in her opinion, and to confirm her suspicion
of the accuser, of whom she again demanded her keys, protesting that,
should she prove refractory, the Count himself should take cognisance
of the affair, whereas, if she would deal ingenuously, she should have
no cause to repent of her confession. So saying, she desired our
adventurer to take the trouble of calling up some of the men-servants;
upon which the conscious criminal began to tremble, and, falling upon
her knees, acknowledged her guilt, and implored the forgiveness of her
young mistress.

Teresa, seizing this occasion to signalise her generosity, joined in
the request, and the offender was pardoned, after having restored the
purse, and promised in the sight of Heaven, that the devil should never
again entice her to the commission of such a crime. This adventure
fully answered all the purposes of our politician; it established the
opinion of his fellow-labourer’s virtue, beyond the power of accident
or information to shake, and set up a false beacon to mislead the
sentiments of Mademoiselle, in case she should for the future meet with
the like misfortune.




CHAPTER TEN

THEY PROCEED TO LEVY CONTRIBUTIONS WITH GREAT SUCCESS, UNTIL OUR HERO
SETS OUT WITH THE YOUNG COUNT FOR VIENNA, WHERE HE ENTERS INTO LEAGUE
WITH ANOTHER ADVENTURER.


Under this secure cover, Teresa levied contributions upon her mistress
with great success. Some trinket was missing every day; the young
lady’s patience began to fail; the faithful attendant was overwhelmed
with consternation, and, with the appearance of extreme chagrin,
demanded her dismission, affirming that these things were certainly
effected by some person in the family, with a view of murdering her
precious reputation. Miss Melvil, not without difficulty, quieted her
vexation with assurances of inviolable confidence and esteem, until a
pair of diamond earrings vanished, when Teresa could no longer keep her
affliction within bounds. Indeed, this was an event of more consequence
than all the rest which had happened, for the jewels were valued at
five hundred florins.

Mademoiselle was accordingly alarmed to such a degree, that she made
her mother acquainted with her loss, and that good lady, who was an
excellent economist, did not fail to give indications of extraordinary
concern. She asked, if her daughter had reason to suspect any
individual in the family, and if she was perfectly confident of her own
woman’s integrity? Upon which Mademoiselle, with many encomiums on the
fidelity and attachment of Teresa, recounted the adventure of the
chambermaid, who immediately underwent a strict inquiry, and was even
committed to prison, on the strength of her former misdemeanour. Our
adventurer’s mate insisted upon undergoing the same trial with the rest
of the domestics, and, as usual, comprehended Fathom in her
insinuations; while he seconded the proposal, and privately counselled
the old lady to introduce Teresa to the magistrate of the place. By
these preconcerted recriminations, they escaped all suspicion of
collusion. After a fruitless inquiry, the prisoner was discharged from
her confinement, and turned out of the service of the Count, in whose
private opinion the character of no person suffered so much, as that of
his own son, whom he suspected of having embezzled the jewels, for the
use of a certain inamorata, who, at that time, was said to have
captivated his affections.

The old gentleman felt upon this occasion all that internal anguish
which a man of honour may be supposed to suffer, on account of a son’s
degeneracy; and, without divulging his sentiments, or even hinting his
suspicions to the youth himself, determined to detach him at once from
such dangerous connexions, by sending him forthwith to Vienna, on
pretence of finishing his exercises at the academy, and ushering him
into acquaintance with the great world. Though he would not be thought
by the young gentleman himself to harbour the least doubt of his
morals, he did not scruple to unbosom himself on that subject to
Ferdinand, whose sagacity and virtue he held in great veneration. This
indulgent patron expressed himself in the most pathetic terms, on the
untoward disposition of his son; he told Fathom, that he should
accompany Renaldo (that was the youth’s name) not only as a companion,
but a preceptor and pattern; conjured him to assist his tutor in
superintending his conduct, and to reinforce the governor’s precepts by
his own example; to inculcate upon him the most delicate punctilios of
honour, and decoy him into extravagance, rather than leave the least
illiberal sentiment in his heart.

Our crafty adventurer, with demonstrations of the utmost sensibility,
acknowledged the great goodness of the Count in reposing such
confidence in his integrity; which, as he observed, none but the worst
of villains could abuse; and fervently wished that he might no longer
exist, than he should continue to remember and resent the obligations
he owed to his kind benefactor. While preparations were making for
their departure, our hero held a council with his associate, whom he
enriched with many sage instructions touching her future operations; he
at the same time disburdened her of all or the greatest part of the
spoils she had won, and after having received divers marks of bounty
from the Count and his lady, together with a purse from his young
mistress, he set out for Vienna, in the eighteenth year of his age,
with Renaldo and his governor, who were provided with letters of
recommendation to some of the Count’s friends belonging to the Imperial
court.

Such a favourable introduction could not fail of being advantageous to
a youth of Ferdinand’s specious accomplishments; for he was considered
as the young Count’s companion, admitted into his parties, and included
in all the entertainments to which Renaldo was invited. He soon
distinguished himself by his activity and address, in the course of
those exercises that were taught at the academy of which he was pupil;
his manners were so engaging as to attract the acquaintance of his
fellow-students, and his conversation being sprightly and inoffensive,
grew into very great request; in a word, he and the young Count formed
a remarkable contrast, which, in the eye of the world, redounded to his
advantage.

They were certainly, in all respects, the reverse of each other.
Renaldo, under a total defect of exterior cultivation, possessed a most
excellent understanding, with every virtue that dignifies the human
heart; while the other, beneath a most agreeable outside, with an
inaptitude and aversion to letters, concealed an amazing fund of
villany and ingratitude. Hitherto his observation had been confined to
a narrow sphere, and his reflections, though surprisingly just and
acute, had not attained to that maturity which age and experience give;
but now, his perceptions began to be more distinct, and extended to a
thousand objects which had never before come under his cognisance.

He had formerly imagined, but was now fully persuaded, that the sons of
men preyed upon one another, and such was the end and condition of
their being. Among the principal figures of life, he observed few or no
characters that did not bear a strong analogy to the savage tyrants of
the wood. One resembled a tiger in fury and rapaciousness; a second
prowled about like an hungry wolf, seeking whom he might devour; a
third acted the part of a jackal, in beating the bush for game to his
voracious employer; and the fourth imitated the wily fox, in practising
a thousand crafty ambuscades for the destruction of the ignorant and
unwary. This last was the department of life for which he found himself
best qualified by nature and inclination; and he accordingly resolved
that his talent should not rust in his possession. He was already
pretty well versed in all the sciences of play; but he had every day
occasion to see these arts carried to such a surprising pitch of
finesse and dexterity, as discouraged him from building his schemes on
that foundation.

He therefore determined to fascinate the judgment, rather than the eyes
of his fellow-creatures, by a continual exercise of that gift of
deceiving, with which he knew himself endued to an unrivalled degree;
and to acquire unbounded influence with those who might be subservient
to his interest, by an assiduous application to their prevailing
passions. Not that play was altogether left out in the projection of
his economy.— Though he engaged himself very little in the executive
part of gaming, he had not been long in Vienna, when he entered into
league with a genius of that kind, whom he distinguished among the
pupils of the academy, and who indeed had taken up his habitation in
that place with a view to pillage the provincials on their first
arrival in town, before they could be armed with proper circumspection
to preserve their money, or have time to dispose of it in any other
shape.

Similar characters naturally attract each other, and people of our
hero’s principles are, of all others, the most apt to distinguish their
own likeness wheresoever it occurs; because they always keep the
faculty of discerning in full exertion. It was in consequence of this
mutual alertness, that Ferdinand and the stranger, who was a native of
Tyrol, perceived themselves reflected in the dispositions of each
other, and immediately entered into an offensive and defensive
alliance; our adventurer undertaking for the articles of intelligence,
countenance, and counsel, and his associate charging himself with the
risk of execution.




CHAPTER ELEVEN

FATHOM MAKES VARIOUS EFFORTS IN THE WORLD OF GALLANTRY.


Thus connected, they began to hunt in couples; and Fathom, in order to
profit by the alliance with a good grace, contrived a small scheme that
succeeded to his wish. Renaldo being one night intoxicated in the
course of a merry-making with his fellow-pupils, from which Fathom had
purposely absented himself, was by the Tyrolese so artfully provoked to
play, that he could not resist the temptation, but engaged at passdice
with that fell adversary, who, in less than an hour, stripped him of a
pretty round sum. Next day, when the young gentleman recovered the use
of his reflection, he was sensibly chagrined at the folly and
precipitation of his own conduct, an account of which he communicated
in confidence to our hero, with demonstrations of infinite shame and
concern.

Ferdinand, having moralised upon the subject with great sagacity, and
sharply inveighed against the Tyrolese, for the unfair advantage he had
taken, retired to his closet, and wrote the following billet, which was
immediately sent to his ally:—

“The obligations I owe, and the attachments I feel, to the Count de
Melvil, will not suffer me to be an idle spectator of the wrongs
offered to his son, in the dishonourable use, I understand, you made
last night of his unguarded hours. I therefore insist upon your making
immediate restitution of the booty which you so unjustly got; otherwise
I expect you will meet me upon the ramparts, near the bastion de la
Port Neuve, to-morrow morning at daybreak, in order to justify, with
your sword, the finesse you have practised upon the friend of FERDINAND
DE FATHOM.”

The gamester no sooner received this intimation, than, according to the
plan which had been preconcerted betwixt the author and him, he went to
the apartment of Renaldo, and presenting the sum of money which he had
defrauded him of the preceding night, told him, with a stern
countenance, that, though it was a just acquisition, he scorned to
avail himself of his good fortune against any person who entertained
the smallest doubt of his honour.

The young Count, surprised at this address, rejected his offer with
disdain, and desired to know the meaning of such an unexpected
declaration. Upon which, the other produced Ferdinand’s billet, and
threatened, in very high terms, to meet the stripling according to his
invitation, and chastise him severely for his presumption. The
consequence of this explanation is obvious. Renaldo, imputing the
officiousness of Fathom to the zeal of his friendship, interposed in
the quarrel, which was amicably compromised, not a little to the honour
of our adventurer, who thus obtained an opportunity of displaying his
courage and integrity, without the least hazard to his person; while,
at the same time, his confederate recommended himself to the esteem of
the young Count, by his spirited behaviour on this occasion; so that
Renaldo being less shy of his company for the future, the Tyrolese had
the fairer opportunities to prosecute his designs upon the young
gentleman’s purse.

It would be almost superfluous to say, that these were not neglected.
The son of Count Melvil was not deficient in point of penetration; but
his whole study was at that time engrossed by the care of his
education, and he had sometimes recourse to play as an amusement by
which he sought to unbend the severity of his attention. No wonder then
that he fell a prey to an artful gamester, who had been regularly
trained to the profession, and made it the sole study of his life;
especially as the Hungarian was remarkable for a warmth of temper,
which a knight of the post always knows how to manage for his own
advantage.

In the course of these operations, Fathom was a very useful
correspondent. He instructed the Tyrolese in the peculiarities of
Renaldo’s disposition, and made him acquainted with the proper seasons
for profiting by his dexterity. Ferdinand, for example, who, by the
authority derived to him from the injunctions of the old Count,
sometimes took upon himself the office of an adviser, cunningly chose
to counsel the son at those conjunctures when he knew him least able to
bear such expostulation. Advice improperly administered generally acts
in diametrical opposition to the purpose for which it is supposed to be
given; at least this was the case with the young gentleman, who,
inflamed by the reproof of such a tutor, used to obey the dictates of
his resentment in an immediate repetition of that conduct which our
adventurer had taken the liberty to disapprove; and the gamester was
always at hand to minister unto his indignation. By these means he was
disencumbered of divers considerable remittances, with which his father
cheerfully supplied him, on the supposition that they were spent with
taste and liberality, under the direction of our adventurer.

But Ferdinand’s views were not confined to the narrow field of this
alliance. He attempted divers enterprises in the world of gallantry,
conscious of his own personal qualifications, and never doubting that
he could insinuate himself into the good graces of some married lady
about court, or lay an opulent dowager under contribution. But he met
with an obstacle in his endeavours of this kind, which all his art was
unable to surmount. This was no other than the obscurity of his birth,
and the want of a title, without which no person in that country lays
claim to the privileges of a gentleman. Had he foreseen this
inconvenience he might have made shift to obviate the consequences, by
obtaining permission to appear in the character of the Count’s kinsman;
though, in all probability, such an expedient would not have been
extremely agreeable to the old gentleman, who was very tenacious of the
honour of his family; nevertheless, his generosity might have been
prevailed upon to indulge Fathom with such a pretext, in consideration
of the youth’s supposed attachment, and the obligations for which he
deemed himself indebted to his deceased mother.

True it is, Ferdinand, upon his first arrival at Vienna, had been
admitted into fashionable company, on the footing of Renaldo’s
companion, because nobody suspected the defect of his pedigree; and
even after a report had been circulated to the prejudice of his
extraction, by the industry of a lacquey who attended the young Count,
there were not wanting many young people of distinction who still
favoured him with their countenance and correspondence; but he was no
longer invited to private families, in which only he could expect to
profit by his address among the ladies, and had the mortification of
finding himself frequently excepted from parties which were expressly
calculated for the entertainment of the young Count. Luckily, his
spirit was so pliant as to sustain these slights without being much
dejected; instead of repining at the loss of that respect which had
been paid to him at first, he endeavoured, with all his might, to
preserve the little that still remained, and resolved to translate into
a humbler sphere that gallantry which he had no longer opportunities of
displaying in the world of rank and fashion.




CHAPTER TWELVE

HE EFFECTS A LODGMENT IN THE HOUSE OF A RICH JEWELLER.


In consequence of this determination, he to the uttermost exerted his
good-humour among the few friends of consequence his fortune had left,
and even carried his complaisance so far as to become the humble
servant of their pleasures, while he attempted to extend his
acquaintance in an inferior path of life, where he thought his talents
would shine more conspicuous than at the assemblies of the great, and
conduce more effectually to the interest of all his designs. Nor did he
find himself disappointed in that expectation, sanguine as it was. He
soon found means to be introduced to the house of a wealthy bourgeois,
where every individual was charmed with his easy air and extraordinary
qualifications. He accommodated himself surprisingly to the humours of
the whole family; smoked tobacco, swallowed wine, and discoursed of
stones with the husband, who was a rich jeweller; sacrificed himself to
the pride and loquacity of the wife; and played upon the violin, and
sung alternately, for the amusement of his only daughter, a buxom lass,
nearly of his own age, the fruit of a former marriage.

It was not long before Ferdinand had reason to congratulate himself on
the footing he had gained in this society. He had expected to find, and
in a little time actually discovered, that mutual jealousy and rancour
which almost always subsist between a daughter and her step-dame,
inflamed with all the virulence of female emulation; for the disparity
in their ages served only to render them the more inveterate rivals in
the desire of captivating the other sex. Our adventurer having
deliberated upon the means of converting this animosity to his own
advantage, saw no method for this purpose so feasible as that of making
his approaches to the hearts of both, by ministering to each in
private, food for their reciprocal envy and malevolence; because he
well knew that no road lies so direct and open to a woman’s heart as
that of gratifying her passions of vanity and resentment.

When he had an opportunity of being particular with the mother, he
expressed his concern for having unwittingly incurred the displeasure
of Mademoiselle, which, he observed, was obvious in every circumstance
of her behaviour towards him; protesting he was utterly innocent of all
intention of offending her; and that he could not account for his
disgrace any other way, than by supposing she took umbrage at the
direction of his chief regards towards her mother-in-law, which, he
owned, was altogether involuntary, being wholly influenced by that
lady’s superior charms and politeness.

Such a declaration was perfectly well calculated for the meridian of a
dame like her, who with all the intoxications of unenlightened pride,
and an increased appetite for pleasure, had begun to find herself
neglected, and even to believe that her attractions were actually on
the wane. She very graciously consoled our gallant for the mishap of
which he complained, representing Wilhelmina (that was the daughter’s
name) as a pert, illiterate, envious baggage, of whose disgust he ought
to make no consideration; then she recounted many instances of her own
generosity to that young lady, with the returns of malice and
ingratitude she had made; and, lastly, enumerated all the imperfections
of her person, education, and behaviour; that he might see with what
justice the gypsy pretended to vie with those who had been
distinguished by the approbation and even gallantry of the best people
in Vienna.

Having thus established himself her confidant and gossip, he knew his
next step of promotion would necessarily be to the degree of her lover;
and in that belief resolved to play the same game with Mademoiselle
Wilhelmina, whose complexion was very much akin to that of her
stepmother; indeed they resembled each other too much to live upon any
terms of friendship or even decorum. Fathom, in order to enjoy a
private conversation with the young lady, never failed to repeat his
visit every afternoon, till at length he had the pleasure of finding
her disengaged, the jeweller being occupied among his workmen, and his
wife gone to assist at a lying-in.

Our adventurer and the daughter had already exchanged their vows, by
the expressive language of the eyes; he had even declared himself in
some tender ejaculations which had been softly whispered in her ear,
when he could snatch an opportunity of venting them unperceived; nay,
he had upon divers occasions gently squeezed her fair hand, on pretence
of tuning her harpsichord, and been favoured with returns of the same
cordial pressure; so that, instead of accosting her with the fearful
hesitation and reserve of a timid swain, he told her, after the
exercise of the doux-yeux, that he was come to confer with her upon a
subject that nearly concerned her peace; and asked if she had not
observed of late an evident abatement of friendship in her mother’s
behaviour to him, whom she had formerly treated with such marks of
favour and respect. Mademoiselle would not pay so ill a compliment to
her own discernment as to say she had not perceived the alteration;
which, on the contrary, she owned was extremely palpable; nor was it
difficult to divine the cause of such estranged looks. This remark was
accompanied with an irresistible glance; she smiled enchanting, the
colour deepened on her cheeks, her breast began to heave, and her whole
frame underwent a most agreeable confusion.

Ferdinand was not a man to let such a favourable conjuncture pass
unregarded. “Yes, charming Wilhelmina!” exclaimed the politician in an
affected rapture, “the cause is as conspicuous as your attractions. She
hath, in spite of all my circumspection, perceived that passion which
it is not in my power to conceal, and in consequence of which I now
declare myself your devoted adorer; or, conscious of your superior
excellence, her jealousy hath taken the alarm, and, though stung with
conjecture only, repines at the triumph of your perfections. How far
this spirit of malignity may be inflamed to my prejudice, I know not.
Perhaps, as this is the first, it may be also the last opportunity I
shall have of avowing the dearest sentiments of my heart to the fair
object that inspired them; in a word, I may be for ever excluded from
your presence. Excuse me, then, divine creature! from the practice of
those unnecessary forms, which I should take pride in observing, were I
indulged with the ordinary privileges of an honourable lover; and, once
for all, accept the homage of an heart overflowing with love and
admiration. Yes, adorable Wilhelmina! I am dazzled with your
supernatural beauty; your other accomplishments strike me with wonder
and awe. I am enchanted by the graces of your deportment, ravished with
the charms of your conversation; and there is a certain tenderness of
benevolence in that endearing aspect, which, I trust, will not fail to
melt with sympathy at the emotions of a faithful slave like me.”

So saying, he threw himself upon his knees, and, seizing her plump
hand, pressed it to his lips with all the violence of real transport.
The nymph, whose passions nature had filled to the brim, could not hear
such a rhapsody unmoved. Being an utter stranger to addresses of this
kind, she understood every word of it in the literal acceptation; she
believed implicitly in the truth of the encomiums he had bestowed, and
thought it reasonable he should be rewarded for the justice he had done
to her qualifications, which had hitherto been almost altogether
overlooked. In short, her heart began to thaw, and her face to hang out
the flag of capitulation; which was no sooner perceived by our hero,
than he renewed his attack with redoubled fervour, pronouncing in a
most vehement tone, “Light of my eyes, and empress of my soul! behold
me prostrate at your feet, waiting with the most pious resignation, for
that sentence from your lips, on which my future happiness or misery
must altogether depend. Not with more reverence does the unhappy bashaw
kiss the sultan’s letter that contains his doom, than I will submit to
your fatal determination. Speak then, angelic sweetness! for never, ah!
never will I rise from this suppliant posture, until I am encouraged to
live and hope. No! if you refuse to smile upon my passion, here shall I
breathe the last sighs of a despairing lover; here shall this faithful
sword do the last office to its unfortunate master, and shed the blood
of the truest heart that ever felt the cruel pangs of disappointed
love.”

The young lady, well-nigh overcome by this effusion, which brought the
tears into her eyes, “Enough, enough,” cried she, interrupting him,
“sure you men were created for the ruin of our sex.”—“Ruin!” re-echoed
Fathom, “talk not of ruin and Wilhelmina! let these terms be for ever
parted, far as the east and west asunder! let ever smiling peace attend
her steps, and love and joy still wanton in her train! Ruin, indeed,
shall wait upon her enemies, if such there be, and those love-lorn
wretches who pine with anguish under her disdain. Grant me, kind
Heaven, a more propitious boon; direct her genial regards to one whose
love is without example, and whose constancy is unparalleled. Bear
witness to my constancy and faith, ye verdant hills, ye fertile plains,
ye shady groves, ye purling streams; and if I prove untrue, ah! let me
never find a solitary willow or a bubbling brook, by help of which I
may be enabled to put a period to my wretched life.”

Here this excellent actor began to sob most piteously, and the
tender-hearted Wilhelmina, unable longer to withstand his moving tale,
with a repetition of the interjection, ah! gently dropped into his
arms. This was the beginning of a correspondence that soon rose to a
very interesting pitch; and they forthwith concerted measures for
carrying it on without the knowledge or suspicion of her mother-in-law.
Nevertheless, the young lady, vanquished as she was, and unskilled in
the ways of men, would not all at once yield at discretion; but
insisted upon those terms, without which no woman’s reputation can be
secured. Our lover, far from seeking to evade the proposal, assented to
it in terms of uncommon satisfaction, and promised to use his whole
industry in finding a priest upon whose discretion they could rely;
nay, he certainly resolved to comply with her request in good earnest,
rather than forfeit the advantages which he foresaw in their union. His
good fortune, however, exempted him from the necessity of taking such a
step, which at best must have been disagreeable; for so many
difficulties occurred in the inquiry which was set on foot, and so
artfully did Fathom in the meantime manage the influence he had already
gained over her heart, that, before her passion could obtain a legal
gratification, she surrendered to his wish, without any other
assurance, than his solemn profession of sincerity and truth, on which
she reposed herself with the most implicit confidence and faith.




CHAPTER THIRTEEN

HE IS EXPOSED TO A MOST PERILOUS INCIDENT IN THE COURSE OF HIS INTRIGUE
WITH THE DAUGHTER.


He was rejoiced to find her so easily satisfied in such a momentous
concern, for the principal aim of the intrigue was to make her
necessary to his interested views, and even, if possible, an associate
in the fraudulent plans he had projected upon her father; consequently
he considered this relaxation in her virtue as an happy omen of his
future success. All the obstacles to their mutual enjoyment being thus
removed, our adventurer was by his mistress indulged with an
assignation in her own chamber, which, though contiguous to that of her
stepmother, was provided with a door that opened into a common
staircase, to which he had access at all hours of the night.

He did not neglect the rendezvous, but, presenting himself at the
appointed time, which was midnight, made the signal they had agreed
upon, and was immediately admitted by Wilhelmina, who waited for hire
with a lover’s impatience. Fathom was not deficient in those
expressions of rapture that are current on those occasions; but, on the
contrary, became so loud in the transports of self-congratulation, that
his voice reached the ears of the vigilant stepmother, who wakening the
jeweller from his first nap, gave him to understand that some person
was certainly in close conversation with his daughter; and exhorted him
to rise forthwith, and vindicate the honour of his family.

The German, who was naturally of a phlegmatic habit, and never went to
bed without a full dose of the creature, which added to his
constitutional drowsiness, gave no ear to his wife’s intimation, until
she had repeated it thrice, and used other means to rouse him from the
arms of slumber. Meanwhile Fathom and his inamorata overheard her
information, and our hero would have made his retreat immediately,
through the port by which he entered, had not his intention been
overruled by the remonstrances of the young lady, who observed that the
door was already fast bolted, and could not possibly be opened without
creating a noise that would confirm the suspicion of her parents; and
that over and above this objection he would, in sallying from that
door, run the risk of being met by her father, who in all probability
would present himself before it, in order to hinder our hero’s escape.
She therefore conveyed him softly into her closet, where she assured
him he might remain with great tranquillity, in full confidence that
she would take such measures as would effectually screen him from
detection.

He was fain to depend upon her assurance, and accordingly ensconced
himself behind her dressing-table; but he could not help sweating with
apprehension, and praying fervently to God for his deliverance, when he
heard the jeweller thundering at the door, and calling to his daughter
for admittance. Wilhelmina, who was already undressed, and had
purposely extinguished the light, pretended to be suddenly waked from
her sleep, and starting up, exclaimed in a tone of surprise and
affright, “Jesu, Maria! what is the matter?”—“Hussy!” replied the
German in a terrible accent, “open the door this instant; there is a
man in your bedchamber, and, by the lightning and thunder! I will wash
away the stain he has cast upon my honour with the schellum’s
heart’s-blood.”

Not at all intimidated by this boisterous threat, she admitted him
without hesitation, and, with a shrillness of voice peculiar to
herself, began to hold forth upon her own innocence and his unjust
suspicion, mingling in her harangue sundry oblique hints against her
mother-in-law, importing, that some people were so viciously inclined
by their own natures, that she did not wonder at their doubting the
virtue of other people; but that these people despised the insinuations
of such people, who ought to be more circumspect in their own conduct,
lest they themselves should suffer reprisals from those people whom
they had so maliciously slandered.

Having uttered these flowers of rhetoric, which were calculated for the
hearing of her step-dame, who stood with a light at her husband’s back,
the young lady assumed an ironical air, and admonished her father to
search every corner of her apartment. She even affected to assist his
inquiry; with her own hands pulled out a parcel of small drawers, in
which her trinkets were contained; desired him to look into her
needlecase and thimble, and, seeing his examination fruitless,
earnestly intreated him to rummage her closet also, saying, with a
sneer, that, in all probability, the dishonourer would be found in that
lurking-place. The manner in which she pretended to ridicule his
apprehensions made an impression upon the jeweller, who was very well
disposed to retreat into his own nest, when his wife, with a certain
slyness in her countenance, besought him to comply with his daughter’s
request, and look into that same closet, by which means Wilhelmina’s
virtue would obtain a complete triumph.

Our adventurer, who overheard the conversation, was immediately seized
with a palsy of fear. He trembled at every joint, the sweat trickled
down his forehead, his teeth began to chatter, his hair to stand on
end; and he, in his heart, bitterly cursed the daughter’s petulance,
the mother’s malice, together with his own precipitation, by which he
was involved in an adventure so pregnant with danger and disgrace.
Indeed, the reader may easily conceive his disorder, when he heard the
key turning in the lock, and the German swearing that he would make him
food for the beasts of the field and the fowls of the air.

Fathom had come unprepared with weapons of defence, was naturally an
economist of his person, and saw himself on the brink of forfeiting not
only the promised harvest of his double intrigue, but also the
reputation of a man of honour, upon which all his future hopes
depended. His agony was therefore unspeakable, when the door flew open;
and it was not till after a considerable pause of recollection, that he
perceived the candle extinguished by the motion of the air produced
from the German’s sudden irruption. This accident, which disconcerted
him so much as to put a full stop to his charge, was very favourable to
our hero, who, summoning all his presence of mind, crept up into the
chimney, while the jeweller stood at the door, waiting for his wife’s
return with another light; so that, when the closet was examined, there
was nothing found to justify the report which the stepmother had made;
and the father, after having made a slight apology to Wilhelmina for
his intrusion, retired with his yoke-fellow into their own chamber.

The young lady, who little thought that her papa would have taken her
at her word, was overwhelmed with confusion and dismay, when she saw
him enter the closet; and, had her lover been discovered, would, in all
probability, have been the loudest in his reproach, and, perhaps, have
accused him of an intention to rob the house; but she was altogether
astonished when she found he had made shift to elude the inquiry of her
parents, because she could not conceive the possibility of his escaping
by the window, which was in the third storey, at a prodigious distance
from the ground; and how he should conceal himself in the apartment,
was a mystery which she could by no means unfold. Before her father and
mother retired, she lighted her lamp, on pretence of being afraid to be
in the dark, after the perturbation of spirits she had undergone; and
her room was no sooner evacuated of such troublesome visitants, than
she secured the doors, and went in quest of her lover.

Accordingly, every corner of the closet underwent a new search, and she
called upon his name with a soft voice, which she thought no other
person would overhear. But Ferdinand did not think proper to gratify
her impatience, because he could not judge of the predicament in which
he stood by the evidence of all his senses, and would not relinquish
his post, until he should be better certified that the coast was clear.
Meanwhile, his Dulcinea, having performed her inquiry to no purpose,
imagined there was something preternatural in the circumstance of his
vanishing so unaccountably, and began to cross herself with great
devotion. She returned to her chamber, fixed the lamp in the fireplace,
and, throwing herself upon the bed, gave way to the suggestions of her
superstition, which were reinforced by the silence that prevailed, and
the gloomy glimmering of the light. She reflected upon the trespass she
had already committed in her heart, and, in the conjectures of her
fear, believed that her lover was no other than the devil himself, who
had assumed the appearance of Fathom, in order to tempt and seduce her
virtue.

While her imagination teemed with those horrible ideas, our adventurer,
concluding, from the general stillness, that the jeweller and his wife
were at last happily asleep, ventured to come forth from his
hiding-place, and stood before his mistress all begrimed with soot.
Wilhelmina, lifting up her eyes, and seeing this sable apparition,
which she mistook for Satan in propria persona, instantly screamed, and
began to repeat her pater-noster with an audible voice. Upon which
Ferdinand, foreseeing that her parents would be again alarmed, would
not stay to undeceive her and explain himself, but, unlocking the door
with great expedition, ran downstairs, and luckily accomplished his
escape. This was undoubtedly the wisest measure he could have taken;
for he had not performed one half of his descent toward the street,
when the German was at his daughter’s bedside, demanding to know the
cause of her exclamation. She then gave him an account of what she had
seen, with all the exaggerations of her own fancy, and, after having
weighed the circumstances of her story, he interpreted the apparition
into a thief, who had found means to open the door that communicated
with the stair; but, having been scared by Wilhelmina’s shriek, had
been obliged to retreat before he could execute his purpose.

Our hero’s spirits were so wofully disturbed by this adventure, that,
for a whole week, he felt no inclination to visit his inamorata, and
was not without apprehension that the affair had terminated in an
explanation very little to his advantage. He was, however, delivered
from this disagreeable suspense, by an accidental meeting with the
jeweller himself, who kindly chid him for his long absence, and
entertained him in the street with an account of the alarm which his
family had sustained, by a thief who broke into Wilhelmina’s apartment.
Glad to find his apprehension mistaken, he renewed his correspondence
with the family, and, in a little time, found reason to console himself
for the jeopardy and panic he had undergone.




CHAPTER FOURTEEN

HE IS REDUCED TO A DREADFUL DILEMMA, IN CONSEQUENCE OF AN ASSIGNATION
WITH THE WIFE.


Nor was his whole care and attention engrossed by the execution of this
scheme upon the daughter. While he managed his concerns in that quarter
with incredible ardour and application, he was not the less
indefatigable in the prosecution of his design upon the mother-in-law,
which he forwarded with all his art during those opportunities he
enjoyed in the absence of Wilhelmina, who was frequently called away by
the domestic duties of the house. The passions of the jeweller’s wife
were in such a state of exaltation, as exempted our hero from the
repulses and fatigue attending a long siege.

We have already observed how cunningly he catered for the gratification
of her ruling appetite, and have exhibited pregnant proofs of his
ability in gaining upon the human heart; the reader will not therefore
be surprised at the rapidity of his conquest over the affections of a
lady whose complexion was perfectly amorous, and whose vanity laid her
open to all the attempts of adulation. In a word, matters were quickly
brought to such a mutual understanding, that, one evening, while they
amused themselves at lansquenet, Fathom conjured her to give him the
rendezvous next day at the house of any third person of her own sex, in
whose discretion she could confide; and, after a few affected scruples
on her side, which he well knew how to surmount, she complied with his
request, and the circumstances of the appointment were settled
accordingly. After this treaty, their satisfaction rose to such a
warmth, and the conversation became so reciprocally endearing, that our
gallant expressed his impatience of waiting so long for the
accomplishment of his wishes, and, with the most eager transport,
begged she would, if possible, curtail the term of his expectation,
that his brain might not suffer by his standing so many tedious hours
on the giddy verge of rapture.

The dame, who was naturally compassionate, sympathised with his
condition, and, unable to resist his pathetic supplications, gave him
to understand that his desire could not be granted, without subjecting
them both to some hazard, but that she was disposed to run any risk in
behalf of his happiness and peace. After this affectionate preamble,
she told him that her husband was then engaged in a quarterly meeting
of the jewellers, from whence he never failed to return quite
overwhelmed with wine, tobacco, and the phlegm of his own constitution;
so that he would fall fast asleep as soon as his head should touch the
pillow, and she be at liberty to entertain the lover without
interruption, provided he could find means to deceive the jealous
vigilance of Wilhelmina, and conceal himself in some corner of the
house, unsuspected and unperceived.

Our lover, remembering his adventure with the daughter, would have
willingly dispensed with this expedient, and began to repent of the
eagerness with which he had preferred his solicitation; but, seeing
there was now no opportunity of retracting with honour, he affected to
enter heartily into the conversation, and, after much canvassing, it
was determined, that, while Wilhelmina was employed in the kitchen, the
mother should conduct our adventurer to the outer door, where he should
pay the compliment of parting, so as to be overheard by the young lady;
but, in the meantime, glide softly into the jeweller’s bedchamber,
which was a place they imagined least liable to the effects of a
daughter’s prying disposition, and conceal himself in a large press or
wardrobe, that stood in one corner of the apartment. The scene was
immediately acted with great success, and our hero cooped up in his
cage, where he waited so long, that his desires began to subside, and
his imagination to aggravate the danger of his situation.

“Suppose,” said he to himself, “this brutal German, instead of being
stupefied with wine, should come home inflamed with brandy, to the use
of which he is sometimes addicted, far from feeling any inclination to
sleep, he will labour under the most fretful anxiety of watching; every
irascible particle in his disposition will be exasperated; he will be
offended with every object that may present itself to his view; and, if
there is the least ingredient of jealousy in his temper, it will
manifest itself in riot and rage. What if his frenzy should prompt him
to search his wife’s chamber for gallants? this would certainly be the
first place to which he would direct his inquiry; or, granting this
supposition chimerical, I may be seized with an irresistible
inclination to cough, before he is oppressed with sleep; he may be
waked by the noise I shall make in disengaging myself from this
embarrassed situation; and, finally, I may find it impracticable to
retire unseen or unheard, after everything else shall have succeeded to
my wish.”

These suggestions did not at all contribute to the quiet of our
adventurer, who, having waited three whole hours in the most
uncomfortable suspense, heard the jeweller brought into the room in
that very condition which his fears had prognosticated. He had, it
seems, quarrelled over his cups with another tradesman, and received a
salutation on the forehead with a candlestick, which not only left an
ignominious and painful mark upon his countenance, but even disordered
his brain to a very dangerous degree of delirium; so that, instead of
allowing himself quietly to be undressed and put to bed by his wife, he
answered all her gentle admonitions and caresses with the most
opprobrious invectives and obstreperous behaviour; and, though he did
not tax her with infidelity to his bed, he virulently accused her of
extravagance and want of economy; observed, her expensive way of living
would bring him to a morsel of bread; and unfortunately recollecting
the attempt of the supposed thief, started up from his chair, swearing
by G—’s mother that he would forthwith arm himself with a brace of
pistols, and search every apartment in the house. “That press,” said
he, with great vociferation, “may, for aught I know, be the receptacle
of some ruffian.”

So saying, he approached the ark in which Fathom was embarked, and
exclaiming, “Come forth, Satan,” applied his foot to the door of it,
with such violence as threw him from the centre of gravity, and laid
him sprawling on his back. This address made such an impression upon
our adventurer, that he had well-nigh obeyed the summons, and burst
from his concealment, in a desperate effort to escape, without being
recognised by the intoxicated German; and indeed, had the application
been repeated, he in all likelihood would have tried the experiment,
for by this time his terrors had waxed too strong to be much longer
suppressed. From this hazardous enterprise he was, however, exempted by
a lucky accident that happened to his disturber, whose head chancing to
pitch upon the corner of a chair in his fall, he was immediately lulled
into a trance, during which the considerate lady, guessing the disorder
of her gallant, and dreading further interruption, very prudently
released him from his confinement, after she had put out the light, and
in the dark conveyed him to the door, where he was comforted with the
promise that she would punctually remember the rendezvous of next day.

She then invoked the assistance of the servants, who, being waked for
the purpose, lifted up their master, and tumbled him into bed, while
Ferdinand hied him home in an universal sweat, blessing himself from
any future achievement of that sort in a house where he had been twice
in such imminent danger of life and reputation. Nevertheless, he did
not fail to honour the assignation, and avail himself of the
disposition his mistress manifested to make him all the recompense in
her power for the disappointment and chagrin which he had undergone.




CHAPTER FIFTEEN

BUT AT LENGTH SUCCEEDS IN HIS ATTEMPT UPON BOTH.


Having thus gained a complete victory over the affections of these two
ladies, he began to convert his good fortune to the purposes of that
principle, from which his view was never, no, not for a moment,
detached. In other words, he used them as ministers and purveyors to
his avarice and fraud. As for the mother-in-law, she was of herself so
liberal as to anticipate the wishes of any moderate adventurer, and
presented him with sundry valuable jewels, as memorials of her esteem;
nor was the daughter backward in such expressions of regard; she
already considered his interest as her own, and took frequent
opportunities of secreting for his benefit certain stray trinkets that
she happened to pick up in her excursions within doors.

All these gratifications he received with demonstrations of infinite
constraint and reluctance, and, in the midst of his rapacious
extortion, acted so cunningly as to impose himself upon both for a
miracle of disinterested integrity. Yet, not contented with what he
thus could earn, and despairing of being able to steer the bark of his
fortune for any length of time between two such dangerous quicksands,
he resolved to profit by the occasion while it lasted, and strike some
considerable stroke at once. A plan was formed in consequence of this
determination, and, at an appointment with the mother in the house of
their female friend, our adventurer appeared with an air of dejection,
which he veiled with a thin cover of forced pleasantry, that his
mistress might suppose he endeavoured to conceal some mortal chagrin
that preyed upon his heart.

The stratagem succeeded to his wish. She observed his countenance
between whiles overcast, took notice of the involuntary sighs he
heaved; and, with the most tender expressions of sympathy, conjured him
to make her acquainted with the cause of his affliction. Instead of
gratifying her request immediately, he evaded her questions with a
respectful reserve, implying, that his love would not suffer him to
make her a partner in his sorrow; and this delicacy on his part whetted
her impatience and concern to such a degree, that, rather than keep her
in such an agony of doubt and apprehension, he was prevailed upon to
tell her, that he had been, the preceding night, engaged with a company
of his fellow-students, where he had made too free with the champagne,
so that his caution forsook him, and he had been decoyed into play by a
Tyrolese gamester, who stripped him of all his ready money, and
obtained from him an obligation for two hundred florins, which he could
not possibly pay without having recourse to his relation the Count de
Melvil, who would have just cause to be incensed at his extravagance.

This information he concluded, by declaring that, cost what it would,
he was resolved to make a candid confession of the truth, and throw
himself entirely upon the generosity of his patron, who could inflict
no other punishment than that of discarding him from his favour and
protection,—a misfortune which, how grievous soever it might be, he
should be able to sustain with fortitude, could he fall upon some
method of satisfying the Tyrolese, who was very importunate and savage
in his demand. His kind mistress no sooner found out the source of his
inquietude, than she promised to dry it up, assuring him that next day,
at the same hour, she would enable him to discharge the debt; so that
he might set his heart at ease, and recollect that gaiety which was the
soul of her enjoyment.

He expressed the utmost astonishment at this generous proffer, which,
however, he declined, with an affected earnestness of refusal,
protesting, that he should be extremely mortified, if he thought she
looked upon him as one of those mercenary gallants who could make such
a sordid use of a lady’s affection. “No, madam,” cried our politician
in a pathetic strain, “whatever happens, I shall never part with that
internal consolation, that conscious honour never fails to yield in the
deepest scenes of solitary distress. The attachment I have the honour
to profess for your amiable person, is not founded on such inglorious
motives, but is the genuine result of that generous passion which none
but the noble-minded feel, and the only circumstance of this misfortune
that I dread to encounter, is the necessity of withdrawing myself for
ever from the presence of her whose genial smiles could animate my soul
against all the persecution of adverse fortune.”

This declamation, accompanied with a profound sigh, served only to
inflame her desire of extricating him from the difficulty in which he
was involved. She exhausted all her eloquence in attempting to persuade
him that his refusal was an outrage against her affection. He pretended
to refute her arguments, and remained unshaken by all the power of her
solicitations, until she had recourse to the most passionate
remonstrances of love, and fell at his feet in the posture of a forlorn
shepherdess. What he refused to her reason, he granted to her tears,
because his heart was melted by her affliction, and next day
condescended to accept of her money, out of pure regard to her
happiness and peace.

Encouraged by the success of this achievement, he resolved to practise
the same experiment upon Wilhelmina, in hope of extracting an equal
share of profit from her simplicity and attachment, and, at their very
next nocturnal rendezvous in her chamber, reacted the farce already
rehearsed, with a small variation, which he thought necessary to
stimulate the young lady in his behalf. He rightly concluded, that she
was by no means mistress of such a considerable sum as he had already
extorted from her mother, and therefore thought proper to represent
himself in the most urgent predicament, that her apprehension, on his
account, might be so alarmed as to engage her in some enterprise for
his advantage, which otherwise she would never have dreamed of
undertaking. With this view, after having described his own calamitous
situation, in consequence of her pressing entreaties, which he affected
to evade, he gave her to understand, that there was no person upon
earth to whom he would have recourse in this emergency; for which
reason he was determined to rid himself of all his cares at once, upon
the friendly point of his own faithful sword.

Such a dreadful resolution could not fail to operate upon the tender
passions of his Dulcinea; she was instantly seized with an agony of
fear and distraction. Her grief manifested itself in a flood of tears,
while she hung round his neck, conjuring him in the most melting terms,
by their mutual love, in which they had been so happy, to lay aside
that fatal determination, which would infallibly involve her in the
same fate; for, she took Heaven to witness, that she would not one
moment survive the knowledge of his death.

He was not deficient in expressions of reciprocal regard. He extolled
her love and tenderness with a most extravagant eulogium, and seemed
wrung with mortal anguish at the prospect of parting for ever from his
lovely Wilhelmina; but his honour was a stern and rigid creditor, that
could not be appeased, except with his blood; and all the boon she
could obtain, by dint of the most woful supplication, was a promise to
defer the execution of his baleful purpose for the space of
four-and-twenty hours, during which she hoped Heaven would
compassionate her sufferings, and inspire her with some contrivance for
their mutual relief. Thus he yielded to her fervent request, rather
with a view to calm the present transports of her sorrow, than with any
expectation of seeing himself redeemed from his fate by her
interposition; such at least were his professions when he took his
leave, assuring her, that he would not quit his being before he should
have devoted a few hours to another interview with the dear object of
his love.

Having thus kindled the train, he did not doubt that the mine of his
craft would take effect, and repaired to his own lodging, in full
persuasion of seeing his aim accomplished, before the time fixed for
their last assignation. His prognostic was next morning verified by the
arrival of a messenger, who brought to him a small parcel, to which was
cemented, with sealing wax, the following epistle:—

“JEWEL OF MY SOUL!—Scarce had you, last night, quitted my disconsolate
arms, when I happily recollected that there was in my possession a gold
chain, of value more than sufficient to answer the exigence of your
present occasions. It was pledged to my grandfather for two hundred
crowns by a knight of Malta, who soon after perished in a sea
engagement with the enemies of our faith, so that it became the
property of our house, and was bequeathed to me by the old gentleman,
as a memorial of his particular affection. Upon whom can I more
properly bestow it, than him who is already master of my heart! Receive
it, therefore, from the bearer of this billet, and convert it, without
scruple, to that use which shall be most conducive to your ease and
satisfaction; nor seek, from a true romantic notion of honour, which I
know you entertain, to excuse yourself from accepting this testimony of
my affection. For I have already sworn before an image of our blessed
Lady, that I will no longer own you as the sovereign of my heart, nor
even indulge you with another interview, if you reject this mark of
tenderness and concern from your ever faithful WILHELMINA.”

The heart of our adventurer began to bound with joy when he surveyed
the contents of this letter; and his eyes sparkled with transport at
sight of the chain, which he immediately perceived to be worth twice
the sum she had mentioned. Nevertheless, he would not avail himself,
without further question, of her generosity; but, that same night,
repairing to her apartment at the usual hour of meeting, he prostrated
himself before her, and counterfeiting extreme agitation of spirit,
begged, in the most urgent terms, not even unaccompanied with tears,
that she would take back the present, which he tendered for her
acceptance, and spare him the most insufferable mortification of
thinking himself exposed to the imputation of being mercenary in his
love. Such, he said, was the delicacy of his passion, that he could not
possibly exist under the apprehension of incurring a censure so
unworthy of his sentiments; and he would a thousand times sooner
undergo the persecution of his rancorous creditor, than bear the
thought of being in the smallest consideration lessened in her esteem;
nay, so far did he carry his pretensions to punctilio, as to protest,
that, should she refuse to quiet the scruples of his honour on this
score, her unyielding beneficence would serve only to hasten the
execution of his determined purpose, to withdraw himself at once from a
life of vanity and misfortune.

The more pathetically he pleaded for her compliance, the more
strenuously did she resist his remonstrances. She advanced all the
arguments her reason, love, and terror could suggest, reminded him of
her oath, from which he could not suppose she would recede, whatever
the consequence might be; and in conclusion vowed to Heaven, with great
solemnity and devotion, that she would not survive the news of his
death. Thus the alternative she offered was either to retain the chain
and be happy in her affection, or forfeit all title to her love, and
die in the conviction of having brought his innocent mistress to an
untimely grave.

His fortitude was not proof against this last consideration. “My savage
honour,” said he, “would enable me to endure the pangs of eternal
separation in the confidence of being endowed with the power of ending
these tortures by the energy of my own hand; but the prospect of
Wilhelmina’s death, and that too occasioned by my inflexibility,
disarms my soul of all her resolution, swallows up the dictates of my
jealous pride, and fills my bosom with such a gush of tenderness and
sorrow, as overwhelms the whole economy of my purpose! Yes, enchanting
creature! I sacrifice my glory to that irresistible reflection; and,
rather than know myself the cruel instrument of robbing the world of
such perfection, consent to retain the fatal testimony of your love.”

So saying, he pocketed the chain, with an air of ineffable
mortification, and was rewarded for his compliance with the most
endearing caresses of his Dulcinea, who, amidst the tumults of her joy,
ejaculated a thousand acknowledgments to Heaven for having blessed her
with the affection of such a man, whose honour was unrivalled by
anything but his love.




CHAPTER SIXTEEN

HIS SUCCESS BEGETS A BLIND SECURITY, BY WHICH HE IS ONCE AGAIN
WELL-NIGH ENTRAPPED IN HIS DULCINEA’S APARTMENT.


In this manner did the crafty Fathom turn to account those ingratiating
qualifications he inherited from nature, and maintain, with incredible
assiduity and circumspection, an amorous correspondence with two
domestic rivals, who watched the conduct of each other with the most
indefatigable virulence of envious suspicion, until an accident
happened, which had well-nigh overturned the bark of his policy, and
induced him to alter the course, that he might not be shipwrecked on
the rocks that began to multiply in the prosecution of his present
voyage.

The jeweller, who, as a German, wanted neither pride nor ostentation,
never failed to celebrate the anniversary of his birth by an annual
feast granted to his neighbours and friends; and on these occasions was
accustomed to wear that chain which, though bequeathed to his daughter,
he considered as an ornament appertaining to the family, whereof he
himself was head. Accordingly, when the time of this festival revolved,
he, as usual, ordered Wilhelmina to surrender it for the day. This
injunction, the reader will perceive, our young lady was in no
condition to obey; she had, however, foreseen the demand, and contrived
a scheme of behaviour for the occasion, which she forthwith put in
execution.

With an air of uncommon cheerfulness, purposely assumed, she retired to
her closet, on pretence of complying with his desire, and, having
employed a few minutes in rummaging her drawers and disordering her
moveables, uttered a loud shriek, that brought her father instantly
into the apartment, where he found his daughter tossing about her
clothes and trinkets with violent demonstrations of disorder and
affright, and heard her, in a lamentable strain, declare that she was
robbed of her chain, and for ever undone. This was so far from being an
agreeable intimation to the jeweller, that he was struck dumb with
astonishment and vexation, and it was not till after a long pause that
he pronounced the word Sacrament! with an emphasis denoting the most
mortifying surprise.

Soon as that exclamation escaped from his lips, he flew to the
escritoire as if instinctively, and, joining Wilhelmina in her
occupation, tumbled its whole contents upon the floor in a trice.

While he was thus employed, in the most expressive silence, the wife of
his bosom chanced to pass that way, and seeing them both occupied with
such violence and trepidation, believed at first that they were
certainly actuated by the spirit of frenzy; but, when she interposed,
by asking, with great earnestness, the cause of such transports and
distracted behaviour, and heard her husband reply, with an accent of
despair, “The chain! the chain of my forefathers is no more!” she
immediately justified his emotion, by undergoing the same alarm, and,
without further hesitation, engaged herself in the search, beginning
with a song, which might be compared to the hymn of battle among the
Greeks, or rather more aptly to that which the Spartan females sung
round the altar of Diana, surnamed Orthian; for it was attended with
strange gesticulations, and, in the course of utterance, became so loud
and shrill, that the guests, who were by this time partly assembled,
being confounded at the clamour, rushed towards the place from whence
it seemed to proceed, and found their landlord, with his wife and
daughter, in the attitudes of distraction and despair.

When they understood the nature of the case, they condoled the family
on their misfortune, and would have retired, on the supposition that it
would defeat the mirthful intent of their meeting; but the jeweller,
mustering up his whole temper and hospitality, entreated them to excuse
his disorder, and favour him with their company, which, he observed,
was now more than ever wanted, to dispel the melancholy ideas inspired
by his loss. Notwithstanding this apology, and the efforts he made in
the sequel to entertain his friends with jollity and good-humour, his
heart was so linked to the chain, that he could not detach himself from
the thoughts of it, which invaded him at short intervals in such qualms
as effectually spoiled his appetite, and hindered his digestion.

He revolved within himself the circumstances of his disaster, and, in
canvassing all the probable means by which the chain would be stolen,
concluded that the deed must have been done by some person in the
family, who, in consequence of having access to his daughter’s chamber,
had either found the drawer left open by her carelessness and neglect,
or found means to obtain a false key, by some waxen impression; for the
locks of the escritoire were safe and uninjured. His suspicion being
thus confined within his own house, sometimes pitched upon his workmen,
and sometimes upon his wife, who, he thought, was the more likely to
practise such finesse, as she considered Wilhelmina in the light of a
daughter-in-law, whose interest interfered with her own, and who had
often harangued to him in private on the folly of leaving this very
chain in the young lady’s possession.

The more he considered this subject, he thought he saw the more reason
to attribute the damage he had sustained to the machinations of his
spouse, who, he did not doubt, was disposed to feather her own nest, at
the expense of him and his heirs, and who, with the same honest
intention, had already secreted, for her private use, those
inconsiderable jewels which of late had at different times been
missing. Aroused by these sentiments, he resolved to retaliate her own
schemes, by contriving means to visit her cabinet in secret, and, if
possible, to rob the robber of the spoils she had gathered to his
prejudice, without coming to any explanation, which might end in
domestic turmoils and eternal disquiet.

While the husband exercised his reflection in this manner, his innocent
mate did not allow the powers of her imagination to rest in idleness
and sloth. Her observations touching the loss of the chain were such as
a suspicious woman, biassed by hatred and envy, would naturally make.
To her it seemed highly improbable, that a thing of such value, so
carefully deposited, should vanish without the connivance of its
keeper, and without much expense of conjecture, divined the true manner
in which it was conveyed. The sole difficulty that occurred in the
researches of her sagacity, was to know the gallant who had been
favoured with such a pledge of Wilhelmina’s affection; for, as the
reader will easily imagine, she never dreamed of viewing Ferdinand in
that odious perspective. In order to satisfy her curiosity, discover
this happy favourite, and be revenged on her petulant rival, she
prevailed upon the jeweller to employ a scout, who should watch all
night upon the stair, without the knowledge of any other person in the
family, alleging, that in all likelihood, the housemaid gave private
admittance to some lover who was the author of all the losses they had
lately suffered, and that they might possibly detect him in his
nocturnal adventures; and observing that it would be imprudent to
intimate their design to Wilhelmina, lest, through the heedlessness and
indiscretion of youth, she might chance to divulge the secret, so as to
frustrate their aim.

A Swiss, in whose honesty the German could confide, being hired for
this purpose, was posted in a dark corner of the staircase, within a
few paces of the door, which he was directed to watch, and actually
stood sentinel three nights, without perceiving the least object of
suspicion; but, on the fourth, the evil stars of our adventurer
conducted him to the spot, on his voyage to the apartment of his
Dulcinea, with whom he had preconcerted the assignation. Having made
the signal, which consisted of two gentle taps on her door, he was
immediately admitted; and the Swiss no sooner saw him fairly housed,
than he crept softly to the other door, that was left open for the
purpose, and gave immediate intimation of what he had perceived. This
intelligence, however, he could not convey so secretly, but the lovers,
who were always vigilant upon these occasions, overheard a sort of
commotion in the jeweller’s chamber, the cause of which their
apprehension was ingenious enough to comprehend.

We have formerly observed that our adventurer could not make his
retreat by the door, without running a very great risk of being
detected, and the expedient of the chimney he had no inclination to
repeat; so that he found himself in a very uncomfortable dilemma, and
was utterly abandoned by all his invention and address, when his
mistress, in a whisper, desired him to begin a dialogue, aloud, in an
apology, importing, that he had mistaken the door, and that his
intention was to visit her father, touching a ring belonging to the
young Count Melvil, which she knew Fathom had put into his hands, in
order to be altered.

Ferdinand, seizing the hint, availed himself of it without delay, and,
unbolting the door, pronounced in an audible voice, “Upon my honour,
Mademoiselle, you wrong my intention, if you imagine I came hither with
any disrespectful or dishonourable motive. I have business with your
father, which cannot be delayed till to-morrow, without manifest
prejudice to my friend and myself; therefore I took the liberty of
visiting him at these untimely hours, and it has been my misfortune to
mistake the door in the dark. I beg pardon for my involuntary
intrusion, and again assure you, that nothing was farther from my
thoughts than any design to violate that respect which I have always
entertained for you and your father’s family.”

To this remonstrance, which was distinctly heard by the German and his
wife, who by this time stood listening at the door, the young lady
replied, in a shrill accent of displeasure, “Sir, I am bound to believe
that all your actions are conducted by honour; but you must give me
leave to tell you, that your mistake is a little extraordinary, and
your visit, even to my father, at this time of the night, altogether
unseasonable, if not mysterious. As for the interruption I have
suffered in my repose, I impute it to my own forgetfulness, in leaving
my door unlocked, and blame myself so severely for the omission, that I
shall, to-morrow, put it out of my own power to be guilty of the like
for the future, by ordering the passage to be nailed up; meanwhile, if
you would persuade me of your well-meaning, you will instantly
withdraw, lest my reputation should suffer by your continuance in my
apartment.”

“Madam,” answered our hero, “I will not give you an opportunity to
repeat the command, which I shall forthwith obey, after having
entreated you once more to forgive the disturbance I have given.” So
saying, he gently opened the door, and, at sight of the German and his
wife, who, he well knew, waited for his exit, started back, and gave
tokens of confusion, which was partly real and partly affected. The
jeweller, fully satisfied with Fathom’s declaration to his daughter,
received him with a complaisant look, and, in order to alleviate his
concern, gave him to understand, that he already knew the reason of his
being in that apartment, and desired to be informed of what had
procured him the honour to see him at such a juncture.

“My dear friend,” said our adventurer, pretending to recollect himself
with difficulty, “I am utterly ashamed and confounded to be discovered
in this situation; but, as you have overheard what passed between
Mademoiselle and me, I know you will do justice to my intention, and
forgive my mistake. After begging pardon for having intruded upon your
family at these hours, I must now tell you that my cousin, Count
Melvil, was some time ago so much misrepresented to his mother by
certain malicious informers, who delight in sowing discord in private
families, that she actually believed her son an extravagant
spendthrift, who had not only consumed his remittances in the most
riotous scenes of disorder, but also indulged a pernicious appetite for
gaming, to such a degree, that he had lost all his clothes and jewels
at play. In consequence of such false information, she expostulated
with him in a severe letter, and desired he would transmit to her that
ring which is in your custody, it being a family stone, for which she
expressed an inestimable value. The young gentleman, in his answer to
her reproof, endeavoured to vindicate himself from the aspersions which
had been cast upon his character, and, with regard to the ring, told
her it was at present in the hands of a jeweller, in order to be new
set according to her own directions, and that, whenever it should be
altered, he would send it home to her by some safe conveyance. This
account the good lady took for an evasion, and upon that supposition
has again written to him, in such a provoking style, that, although the
letter arrived but half an hour ago, he is determined to despatch a
courier before morning with the mischievous ring, for which, in
compliance with the impetuosity of his temper, I have taken the freedom
to disturb you at this unseasonable hour.”

The German paid implicit faith to every circumstance of his story,
which indeed could not well be supposed to be invented extempore; the
ring was immediately restored, and our adventurer took his leave,
congratulating himself upon his signal deliverance from the snare in
which he had fallen.




CHAPTER SEVENTEEN

THE STEP-DAME’S SUSPICIONS BEING AWAKENED, SHE LAYS A SNARE FOR OUR
ADVENTURER, FROM WHICH HE IS DELIVERED BY THE INTERPOSITION OF HIS GOOD
GENIUS.


Though the husband swallowed the bait without further inquiry, the
penetration of the wife was not so easily deceived. That same dialogue
in Wilhelmina’s apartment, far from allaying, rather inflamed her
suspicion; because, in the like emergency, she herself had once
profited by the same, or nearly the same contrivance. Without
communicating her doubts to the father, she resolved to double her
attention to the daughter’s future conduct, and keep such a strict eye
over the behaviour of our gallant, that he should find it very
difficult, if not impossible, to elude her observation. For this
purpose she took into her pay an old maiden, of the right sour
disposition, who lived in a house opposite to her own, and directed her
to follow the young lady in all her outgoings, whenever she should
receive from the window a certain signal, which the mother-in-law
agreed to make for the occasion. It was not long before this scheme
succeeded to her wish. The door of communication betwixt Wilhelmina’s
apartment and the staircase being nailed up by the jeweller’s express
order, our adventurer was altogether deprived of those opportunities he
had hitherto enjoyed, and was not at all mortified to find himself so
restricted in a correspondence which began to be tiresome and
disagreeable. But the case was far otherwise with his Dulcinea, whose
passion, the more it was thwarted, raged with greater violence, like a
fire, that, from the attempts that are made to extinguish it, gathers
greater force, and flames with double fury.

Upon the second day of her misfortune, she had written a very tender
billet, lamenting her unhappiness in being deprived of those meetings
which constituted the chief joy of her life, and entreating him to
contrive some means of renewing the delicious commerce in an
unsuspected place. This intimation she proposed to convey privately
into the hand of her lover, during his next visit to the family; but
both were so narrowly eyed by the mother, that she found the execution
of her design impracticable; and next forenoon, on pretence of going to
church, repaired to the house of a companion, who, being also her
confidant, undertook to deliver the billet with her own hand.

The she-dragon employed by her mother, in obedience to the sign which
was displayed from the window immediately put on her veil, and followed
Wilhelmina at a distance, until she saw her fairly housed. She would
not even then return from her excursion, but hovered about in sight of
the door, with a view of making further observations. In less than five
minutes after the young lady disappeared, the scout perceived her
coming out, accompanied by her comrade, from whom she instantly parted,
and bent her way towards the church in good earnest, while the other
steered her course in another direction. The duenna, after a moment’s
suspense and consideration, divined the true cause of this short visit,
and resolved to watch the motions of the confidant, whom she traced to
the academy in which our hero lodged, and from which she saw her
return, after the supposed message was delivered.

Fraught with this intelligence, the rancorous understrapper hied her
home to the jeweller’s wife, and made a faithful recital of what she
had seen, communicating at the same time her own conjectures on that
subject. Her employer was equally astonished and incensed at this
information. She was seized with all that frenzy which takes possession
of a slighted woman, when she finds herself supplanted by a detested
rival; and, in the first transports of her indignation, devoted them as
sacrifices to her vengeance. Nor was her surprise so much the effect of
his dissimulation, as of his want of taste and discernment. She
inveighed against him, not as the most treacherous lover, but as the
most abject wretch, in courting the smiles of such an awkward dowdy,
while he enjoyed the favours of a woman who had numbered princes in the
train of her admirers. For the brilliancy of her attractions, such as
they at present shone, she appealed to the decision of her minister,
who consulted her own satisfaction and interest, by flattering the
other’s vanity and resentment; and so unaccountable did the depravity
of our hero’s judgment appear to this conceited dame, that she began to
believe there was some mistake in the person, and to hope that
Wilhelmina’s gallant was not in reality her professed admirer, Mr.
Fathom, but rather one of his fellow-lodgers, whose passion he favoured
with his mediation and assistance.

On this notion, which nothing but mere vanity could have inspired, in
opposition to so many more weighty presumptions, she took the
resolution of bringing the affair to a fuller explanation, before she
would concert any measures to the prejudice of our adventurer, and
forthwith despatched her spy back to his lodgings, to solicit, on the
part of Wilhelmina, an immediate answer to the letter he had received.
This was an expedition with which the old maiden would have willingly
dispensed, because it was founded upon an uncertainty, which might be
attended with troublesome consequences; but, rather than be the means
of retarding a negotiation so productive of that sort of mischief which
is particularly agreeable to all of her tribe, she undertook to manage
and effect the discovery, in full confidence of her own talents and
experience.

With such a fund of self-sufficiency and instigation, she repaired to
the academy on the instant, and inquiring for Mr. Fathom, was
introduced to his apartment, where she found him in the very act of
writing a billet to the jeweller’s daughter. The artful agent having
asked, with the mysterious air of an expert go-between, if he had not
lately received a message from a certain young lady, and, being
answered in the affirmative, gave him to understand, that she herself
was a person favoured with the friendship and confidence of Wilhelmina,
whom she had known from her cradle, and often dandled on her knee;
then, in the genuine style of a prattling dry nurse, she launched out
in encomiums on his Dulcinea’s beauty and sweetness of temper,
recounting many simple occurrences of her infancy and childhood; and,
finally, desiring a more circumstantial answer to that which she had
sent to him by her friend Catherina. In the course of her loquacity she
had also, according to her instructions, hinted at the misfortune of
the door; and, on the whole, performed her cue with such dexterity and
discretion that our politician was actually overreached, and, having
finished his epistle, committed it to her care, with many verbal
expressions of eternal love and fidelity to his charming Wilhelmina.

The messenger, doubly rejoiced at her achievement, which not only
recommended her ministry, but also gratified her malice, returned to
her principal with great exultation, and, delivering the letter, the
reader will easily conceive the transports of that lady when she read
the contents of it in these words:—

“ANGELIC WILHELMINA!—To forget those ecstatic scenes we have enjoyed
together, or even live without the continuation of that mutual bliss,
were to quit all title to perception, and resign every hope of future
happiness. No! my charmer, while my head retains the least spark of
invention, and my heart glows with the resolution of a man, our
correspondence shall not be cut off by the machinations of an envious
stepmother, who never had attractions to inspire a generous passion;
and, now that age and wrinkles have destroyed what little share of
beauty she once possessed, endeavours, like the fiend in paradise, to
blast those joys in others, from which she is herself eternally
excluded. Doubt not, dear sovereign of my soul! that I will study, with
all the eagerness of desiring love, how to frustrate her malicious
intention, and renew those transporting moments, the remembrance of
which now warms the breast of your ever constant FATHOM.”

Had our hero murdered her father, or left her a disconsolate widow, by
effecting the death of her dear husband, there might have been a
possibility of her exerting the Christian virtues of resignation and
forgiveness; but such a personal outrage as that contained in this
epistle precluded all hope of pardon, and rendered penitence of no
signification. His atrocious crime being now fully ascertained, this
virago gave a loose to her resentment, which became so loud and
tempestuous, that her informer shuddered at the storm she had raised,
and began to repent of having communicated the intelligence which
seemed to have such a violent effect upon hex brain.

She endeavoured, however, to allay the agitation, by flattering her
fancy with the prospect of revenge, and gradually soothed her into a
state of deliberate ire; during which she determined to take ample
vengeance on the delinquent. In the zenith of her rage, she would have
had immediate recourse to poison or steel, had she not been diverted
from her mortal purpose by her counsellor, who represented the danger
of engaging in such violent measures, and proposed a more secure
scheme, in the execution of which she would see the perfidious wretch
sufficiently punished, without any hazard to her own person or
reputation. She advised her to inform the jeweller of Fathom’s efforts
to seduce her conjugal fidelity, and impart to him a plan, by which he
would have it in his power to detect our adventurer in the very act of
practising upon her virtue.

The lady relished her proposal, and actually resolved to make an
assignation with Ferdinand, as usual, and give notice of the
appointment to her husband, that he might personally discover the
treachery of his pretended friend, and inflict upon him such
chastisement as the German’s brutal disposition should suggest, when
inflamed by that species of provocation. Had this project been brought
to bear, Ferdinand, in all likelihood, would have been disqualified
from engaging in any future intrigue; but fate ordained that the design
should be defeated, in order to reserve him for more important
occasions.

Before the circumstances of the plan could be adjusted, it was his good
fortune to meet his Dulcinea in the street, and, in the midst of their
mutual condolence on the interruption they had suffered in their
correspondence, he assured her, that he would never give his invention
respite, until he should have verified the protestations contained in
the letter he had delivered to her discreet agent. This allusion to a
billet she had never received, did not fail to alarm her fears, and
introduce a very mortifying explanation, in which he so accurately
described the person of the messenger, that she forthwith comprehended
the plot, and communicated to our hero her sentiments on that subject.

Though he expressed infinite anxiety and chagrin at this misfortune,
which could not fail to raise new obstacles to their love, his heart
was a stranger to the uneasiness he affected; and rather pleased with
the occasion, which would furnish him with pretences to withdraw
himself gradually from an intercourse by this time become equally
cloying and unprofitable. Being well acquainted with the mother’s
temperament, he guessed the present situation of her thoughts, and
concluding she would make the jeweller a party in her revenge, he
resolved from that moment to discontinue his visits, and cautiously
guard against any future interview with the lady whom he had rendered
so implacable.

It was well for our adventurer that his good fortune so seasonably
interposed; for that same day, in the afternoon, he was favoured with a
billet from the jeweller’s wife, couched in the same tender style she
had formerly used, and importing an earnest desire of seeing him next
day at the wonted rendezvous. Although his penetration was sufficient
to perceive the drift of this message, or at least to discern the risk
he should run in complying with her request, yet he was willing to be
more fully certified of the truth of his suspicion, and wrote an answer
to the billet, in which he assured her, that he would repair to the
place of appointment with all the punctuality of an impatient lover.
Nevertheless, instead of performing this promise, he, in the morning,
took post in a public-house opposite to the place of assignation, in
order to reconnoitre the ground, and about noon had the pleasure of
seeing the German, wrapped in a cloak, enter the door of his wife’s
she-friend, though the appointment was fixed at five in the evening.
Fathom blessed his good angel for having conducted him clear of this
conspiracy, and kept his station with great tranquillity till the hour
of meeting, when he beheld his enraged Thalestris take the same route,
and enjoyed her disappointment with ineffable satisfaction.

Thus favoured with a pretext, he took his leave of her, in a letter,
giving her to understand, that he was no stranger to the barbarous
snare she had laid for him; and upbraiding her with having made such an
ungrateful return for all his tenderness and attachment. She was not
backward in conveying a reply to this expostulation, which seemed to
have been dictated in all the distraction of a proud woman who sees her
vengeance baffled, as well as her love disdained. Her letter was
nothing but a succession of reproaches, menaces, and incoherent
execrations. She taxed him with knavery, insensibility, and
dissimulation; imprecated a thousand curses upon his head, and
threatened not only to persecute his life with all the arts that hell
and malice could inspire, but also to wound him in the person of her
daughter-in-law, who should be enclosed for life in a convent, where
she should have leisure to repent of those loose and disorderly
practices which he had taught her to commit, and of which she could not
pretend innocence, as they had it in their power to confront her with
the evidence of her lover’s own confession. Yet all this denunciation
was qualified with an alternative, by which he was given to understand,
that the gates of mercy were still open, and that penitence was capable
of washing out the deepest stain of guilt.

Ferdinand read the whole remonstrance with great composure and
moderation, and was content to incur the hazard of her hate, rather
than put her to the trouble of making such an effort of generosity, as
would induce her to forgive the heinous offence he had committed; nor
did his apprehension for Wilhelmina in the least influence his
behaviour on this occasion. So zealous was he for her spiritual
concerns, that he would have been glad to hear she had actually taken
the veil; but he knew such a step was not at all agreeable to her
disposition, and that no violence would be offered to her inclinations
on that score, unless her stepmother should communicate to the father
that letter of Fathom’s which she had intercepted, and by which the
German would be convinced of his daughter’s backsliding; but this
measure, he rightly supposed, the wife would not venture to take, lest
the husband, instead of taking her advice touching the young lady,
should seek to compromise the affair, by offering her in marriage to
her debaucher, a proffer which, if accepted, would overwhelm the mother
with vexation and despair. He therefore chose to trust to the effects
of lenient time, which he hoped would gradually weaken the resentment
of this Penthesilea, and dissolve his connexion with the other parts of
the family, from which he longed to be totally detached.

How well soever he might have succeeded in his attempts to shake off
the yoke of the mother, who by her situation in life was restrained
from prosecuting those measures her resentment had planned against his
fortitude and indifference, he would have found greater difficulty than
he had foreseen, in disengaging himself from the daughter, whose
affections he had won under the most solemn professions of honour and
fidelity, and who, now she was debarred of his company and
conversation, and in danger of losing him for ever, had actually taken
the resolution of disclosing the amour to her father, that he might
interpose in behalf of her peace and reputation, and secure her
happiness by the sanction of the church.




CHAPTER EIGHTEEN

OUR HERO DEPARTS FROM VIENNA, AND QUITS THE DOMAIN OF VENUS FOR THE
ROUGH FIELD OF MARS.


Luckily for our adventurer, before she adhered to this determination,
the young Count de Melvil was summoned to Presburg by his father, who
desired to see him, before he should take the field, in consequence of
a rupture between the Emperor and the French King; and Fathom of course
quitted Vienna, in order to attend his patron, after he and Renaldo had
resided two whole years in that capital, where the former had made
himself perfect in all the polite exercises, become master of the
French tongue, and learned to speak the Italian with great facility;
over and above those other accomplishments in which we have represented
him as an inimitable original.

As for the young Count, his exteriors were so much improved by the
company to which he had access, since his departure from his father’s
house, that his parents were equally surprised and overjoyed at the
alteration. All that awkwardness and rusticity, which hung upon his
deportment, was, like the rough coat of a diamond, polished away; the
connexion and disposition of his limbs seemed to have been adjusted
anew; his carriage was become easy, his air perfectly genteel, and his
conversation gay and unrestrained. The merit of this reformation was in
a great measure ascribed to the care and example of Mr. Fathom, who was
received by the old Count and his lady with marks of singular
friendship and esteem; nor was he overlooked by Mademoiselle, who still
remained in a state of celibacy, and seemed to have resigned all hope
of altering her condition; she expressed uncommon satisfaction at the
return of her old favourite, and readmitted him into the same degree of
familiarity with which he had been honoured before his departure.

The joy of Teresa was so excessive at his arrival, that she could
scarce suppress her raptures, so as to conceal them from the notice of
the family; and our hero, upon this occasion, performed the part of an
exquisite actor, in dissembling those transports which his bosom never
knew. So well had this pupil retained the lessons of her instructor,
that, in the midst of those fraudulent appropriations, which she still
continued to make, she had found means to support her interest and
character with Mademoiselle, and even to acquire such influence in the
family, that no other servant, male or female, could pretend to live
under the same roof, without paying incessant homage to this artful
waiting-woman, and yielding the most abject submission to her will.

The young gentlemen having tarried at Presburg about six weeks, during
which a small field equipage was prepared for Renaldo, they repaired to
the camp at Heilbron, under the auspices of Count Melvil, in whose
regiment they carried arms as volunteers, with a view to merit
promotion in the service by their own personal behaviour. Our
adventurer would have willingly dispensed with this occasion of
signalising himself, his talents being much better adapted to another
sphere of life; nevertheless, he affected uncommon alacrity at the
prospect of gathering laurels in the field, and subscribed to his
fortune with a good grace; foreseeing, that even in a campaign, a man
of his art and ingenuity might find means to consult his corporal
safety, without any danger to his reputation. Accordingly, before he
had lived full three weeks in camp, the damp situation, and sudden
change in his way of life, had such a violent effect upon his
constitution, that he was deprived of the use of all his limbs, and
mourned, without ceasing, his hard fate, by which he found himself
precluded from all opportunity of exerting his diligence, courage, and
activity, in the character of a soldier, to which he now aspired.

Renaldo, who was actually enamoured of a martial life, and missed no
occasion of distinguishing himself, consoled his companion with great
cordiality, encouraged him with the hope of seeing his constitution
familiarised to the inconveniences of a camp, and accommodated him with
everything which he thought would alleviate the pain of his body, as
well as the anxiety of his mind. The old Count, who sincerely
sympathised with his affliction, would have persuaded him to retire
into quarters, where he could be carefully nursed, and provided with
everything necessary to a person in his condition; but such was his
desire of glory, that he resisted his patron’s importunities with great
constancy, till at length, seeing the old gentleman obstinately
determined to consult his health by removing him from the field, he
gradually suffered himself to recover the use of his hands, made shift
to sit up in his bed, and amuse himself with cards or backgammon, and,
notwithstanding the feeble condition of his legs, ventured to ride out
on horseback to visit the lines, though the Count and his son would
never yield to his solicitations so far, as to let him accompany
Renaldo in those excursions and reconnoitring parties, by which a
volunteer inures himself to toil and peril, and acquires that knowledge
in the operations of war, which qualifies him for a command in the
service.

Notwithstanding this exemption from all duty, our adventurer managed
matters so as to pass for a youth of infinite mettle, and even rendered
his backwardness and timidity subservient to the support of that
character, by expressing an impatience of lying inactive, and a desire
of signalising his prowess, which even the disabled condition of his
body could scarce restrain. He must be a man of very weak nerves and
excessive irresolution, who can live in the midst of actual service,
without imbibing some portion of military fortitude: danger becomes
habitual, and loses a great part of its terror; and as fear is often
caught by contagion, so is courage communicated among the individuals
of an army. The hope of fame, desire of honours and preferment, envy,
emulation, and the dread of disgrace, are motives which co-operate in
suppressing that aversion to death or mutilation, which nature hath
implanted in the human mind; and therefore it is not to be wondered at,
if Fathom, who was naturally chicken-hearted, gained some advantages
over his disposition before the end of the campaign, which happened to
be neither perilous nor severe.

During the winter, while both armies remained in quarters, our
adventurer attended his patron to Presburg, and, before the troops were
in motion, Renaldo obtained a commission, in consequence of which he
went into garrison at Philipsburg, whither he was followed by our hero,
while the old Count’s duty called him to the field in a different
place. Ferdinand for some time had no reason to be dissatisfied with
this disposition, by which he was at once delivered from the fatigues
of a campaign, and the inspection of a severe censor, in the person of
Count Melvil; and his satisfaction was still increased by an accidental
meeting with the Tyrolese who had been his confederate at Vienna, and
now chanced to serve in garrison on the same footing with himself.
These two knights-errant renewed their former correspondence, and, as
all soldiers are addicted to gaming, levied contributions upon all
those officers who had money to lose, and temerity to play.

However, they had not long pursued this branch of traffic, when their
success was interrupted by a very serious occurrence, that for the
present entirely detached the gentlemen in the garrison from such
amusements. The French troops invested Fort Kehl, situated on the
Rhine, opposite to Strasburg; and the Imperialists, dreading that the
next storm would fall upon Philipsburg, employed themselves with great
diligence to put that important fortress in a proper posture of
defence. If the suspension of play was displeasing to our hero, the
expectation of being besieged was by no means more agreeable. He knew
the excellence of the French engineers, the power of their artillery,
and the perseverance of their general. He felt, by anticipation, the
toils of hard duty upon the works, the horrors of night-alarms,
cannonading, bombardment, sallies, and mines blown up; and deliberated
with himself whether or not he should privately withdraw, and take
refuge among the besiegers; but, when he reflected that such a step,
besides the infamy that must attend it, would be like that of running
upon Scylla, seeking to avoid Charybdis, as he would be exposed to more
danger and inconvenience in the trenches than he could possibly undergo
in the town, and after all run the risk of being taken and treated as a
deserter; upon these considerations he resolved to submit himself to
his destiny, and endeavoured to mitigate the rigour of his fate by
those arts he had formerly practised with success. He accordingly found
means to enjoy a very bad state of health during the whole siege, which
lasted about six weeks after the trenches were opened; and then the
garrison marched out by capitulation, with all the honours of war.




CHAPTER NINETEEN

HE PUTS HIMSELF UNDER THE GUIDANCE OF HIS ASSOCIATE, AND STUMBLES UPON
THE FRENCH CAMP, WHERE HE FINISHES HIS MILITARY CAREER.


Nothing else of moment was transacted during that campaign; and in the
winter our adventurer, with the young Count, and his friend the
Tyrolese, were disposed in quarters of cantonment, where Ferdinand made
himself amends for the chagrin he had undergone, by the exercise of
those talents in which he excelled. Not that he was satisfied with the
sphere of life in which he acted; though he knew himself consummate in
the art of play, he was not at all ambitious of a gamester’s name; nor
did he find himself disposed to hazard those discoveries and
explanations to which heroes of that class are sometimes necessarily
exposed. His aim was to dwell among the tents of civil life,
undisturbed by quarrels and the din of war, and render mankind
subservient to his interest, not by stratagems which irritate, but by
that suppleness of insinuation, which could not fail to soothe the
temper of those on whom he meant to prey.

He saw that all his expectations of Count Melvil’s future favour were
connected with his choice of a military life; and that his promotion in
the service would, in a great measure, depend upon his personal
behaviour in such emergencies as he did not at all wish to encounter.
On the other hand, he confided so much in his own dexterity and
address, that he never doubted of being able to rear a splendid fortune
for himself, provided he could once obtain a fixed and firm foundation.
He had in fancy often enjoyed a prospect of England, not only as his
native country, to which, like a true citizen, he longed to be united;
but also as the land of promise, flowing with milk and honey, and
abounding with subjects on which he knew his talents would be properly
exercised.

These reflections never occurred, without leaving a strong impression
upon the mind of our adventurer, which influenced his deliberations in
such a manner, as at length amounted to a perfect resolution of
withdrawing himself privately from a service that teemed with
disagreeable events, and of transporting himself into the country of
his ancestors, which he considered as the Canaan of all able
adventurers. But, previous to his appearance on that stage, he was
desirous of visiting the metropolis of France, in which he hoped to
improve himself in the knowledge of men and things, and acquire such
intelligence as would qualify him to act a more important part upon the
British scene. After having for some time indulged these prospects in
secret, he determined to accommodate himself with the company and
experience of the Tyrolese, whom, under the specious title of an
associate, he knew he could convert into a very serviceable tool, in
forwarding the execution of his own projects.

Accordingly, the inclination of this confederate was sounded by distant
hints, and being found apt, our hero made him privy to his design of
decamping without beat of drum; though, at the same time, he begged his
advice touching the method of their departure, that he might retire
with as much delicacy as the nature of such a step would permit. Divers
consultations were held upon this subject, before they adhered to the
resolution of making their escape from the army, after it should have
taken the field in the spring; because, in that case, they would have
frequent opportunities of going abroad on foraging parties, and, during
one of these excursions, might retire in such a manner as to persuade
their companions that they had fallen into the enemy’s hands.

Agreeable to this determination, the camp was no sooner formed in
Alsace than our associates began to make preparations for their march,
and had already taken all the previous measures for their departure,
when an accident happened, which our hero did not fail to convert to
his own advantage. This was no other than the desertion of Renaldo’s
valet, who, in consequence of a gentle chastisement, which he had
richly merited, thought proper to disappear, after having plundered his
master’s portmanteau, which he had forced open for the purpose.
Ferdinand, who was the first person that discovered the theft,
immediately comprehended the whole adventure, and, taking it for
granted that the delinquent would never return, resolved to finish what
the fugitive had imperfectly performed.

Being favoured with the unreserved confidence of the young Count, he
instantly had recourse to his bureau, the locks of which he found means
to burst open, and, examining a private drawer, contrived with great
art to conceal Renaldo’s jewels and cash, made himself master of the
contents without hesitation; then cutting open his cloak-bag, and
strewing the tent with his linen and clothes, began to raise his voice,
and produce such a clamour as alarmed the whole neighbourhood, and
brought a great many officers into the tent.

He on this, as on all other occasions, performed his cue to a miracle,
expressing confusion and concern so naturally in his gestures and
exclamation, that no man could possibly suspect his sincerity; nay, to
such a degree of finesse did his cunning amount, that when his friend
and patron entered, in consequence of an intimation he soon received of
his loss, our adventurer exhibited undoubted signs of distraction and
delirium, and, springing upon Renaldo with all the frantic fury of a
bedlamite, “Villain,” cried he, “restore the effects you have stole
from your master, or you shall be immediately committed to the care of
the prevot.” However mortified M. de Melvil might be at his own
misfortune, the condition of his friend seemed to touch him more
nearly; he undervalued his own loss as a trifle that could be easily
repaired; said everything which he thought would tend to soothe and
compose the agitation of Ferdinand; and finally prevailed upon him to
retire to rest. The calamity was wholly attributed to the deserter; and
Renaldo, far from suspecting the true author, took occasion, from his
behaviour on this emergency, to admire him as a mirror of integrity and
attachment; in such an exquisite manner did he plan all his designs,
that almost every instance of his fraud furnished matter of triumph to
his reputation.

Having thus profitably exercised his genius, this subtle politician
thought it high time to relinquish his military expectations, and
securing all his valuable acquisitions about his own person, rode out
with his understrapper, in the midst of fifty dragoons, who went in
quest of forage. While the troopers were employed in making up their
trusses, the two adventurers advanced towards the skirt of a wood, on
pretence of reconnoitring, and the Tyrolese, who undertook to be our
hero’s guide, directing him to a path which leads towards Strasburg,
they suddenly vanished from the eyes of their companions, who in a few
minutes hearing the report of several pistols, which the confederates
purposely fired, conjectured that they had fallen in with a party of
French, by whom they were made prisoners of war.

The Tyrolese had overrated his own knowledge when he took upon himself
the charge of conducting our hero; for upon their arrival at a certain
place, where two roads crossed each other, he chanced to follow that
which not only frustrated their intention, but even led them directly
to the French camp; so that, in the twilight, they fell in upon one of
the outguards before they were aware of their mistake.

Whatever confusion and perplexity they might undergo, when they heard
themselves questioned by the sentinel on the advanced post, certain it
is, they betrayed no symptoms of fear or disorder; but while Ferdinand
endeavoured to recollect himself, his fellow-traveller, with the
appearance of admirable intrepidity and presence of mind, told the
soldier that he and his companion were two gentlemen of family, who had
quitted the Austrian army, on account of having sustained some
ill-usage, which they had no opportunity of resenting in any other way,
and that they were come to offer their services to the French general,
to whose quarters they desired to be immediately conveyed.

The sentinel, to whom such an instance of desertion was neither rare,
nor indeed uncommon, directed them without scruple to the next post,
where they found a serjeant’s party, from which, at their request, they
were transmitted to the officer of the grand guard, and by him next
morning introduced to Count Coigny, who very politely received them as
volunteers in the army of France. Though this translation was not at
all to our hero’s liking, he was forced to acquiesce in his fate, glad
to find himself, on these terms, in possession of his effects, of which
he would otherwise have been infallibly rifled.

This campaign, however, was the most disagreeable period of his whole
life; because the manner in which he had entered into the service
subjected him to the particular observation and notice of the French
officers; so that he was obliged to be very alert in his duty, and
summon all his fortitude to maintain the character he had assumed. What
rendered his situation still more unpalatable, was the activity of both
armies in the course of this season, during which, over and above
sundry fatiguing marches and countermarches, he was personally engaged
in the affair of Halleh, which was very obstinate; where, being in the
skirts of the detachment, he was actually wounded in the face by the
sword of an hussar; but this was, luckily for him, the last time he
found himself under the necessity of exerting his military prowess, for
a cessation of arms was proclaimed before he was cured of his wound,
and peace concluded about the end of the campaign.

During his sojourn in the French camp, he assumed the character of a
man of family, who being disgusted at some supercilious treatment he
had met with in the German service, and at the same time ambitious of
carrying arms under the banners of France, took the opportunity of
retreating by stealth from his friends, accompanied only by one with
whom he could intrust his intention. In this capacity he had managed
his matters to such advantage, that many French officers of rank were
very well disposed to contribute their interest in his behalf, had his
inclination verged towards promotion in the army; but he thought proper
to conceal his real design, under the specious pretext of longing to
see the metropolis of France, that centre of pleasure and politeness,
in which he proposed to spend some time for the improvement of his
address and understanding. These were motives too laudable to be
opposed by his new patrons, some of whom furnished him with letters of
recommendation to certain noblemen of the first rank at the court of
Versailles, for which place he and his companion set out from the banks
of the Rhine, very well satisfied with the honourable dismission they
had obtained from a life of inconvenience, danger, and alarm.




CHAPTER TWENTY

HE PREPARES A STRATAGEM BUT FINDS HIMSELF COUNTERMINED—PROCEEDS ON HIS
JOURNEY, AND IS OVERTAKEN BY A TERRIBLE TEMPEST.


In the course of this journey, Ferdinand, who was never deficient in
his political capacity, held a secret conclave with his own thoughts,
not only touching the plan of his own future conduct, but also
concerning his associate, of whose fidelity and adherence he began to
entertain such doubts as discouraged him from the prosecution of that
design in which the Tyrolese had been at first included; for he had
lately observed him practise the arts of his occupation among the
French officers, with such rapacity and want of caution, as indicated a
dangerous temerity of temper, as well as a furious rage of acquiring,
which might be some time or other satiated upon his own friends. In
other words, our adventurer was afraid that his accomplice would profit
by his knowledge of the road and countries through which they
travelled, and, after having made free with his most valuable effects,
in consequence of the familiarity subsisting between them, leave him
some morning without the ceremony of a formal adieu.

Aroused by this suspicion, he resolved to anticipate the supposed
intention of the Tyrolese, by taking his own departure in the same
abrupt manner; and this scheme he actually put in execution, upon their
arrival in Bar-le-duc, where it was agreed they should spend a day to
repose and refresh themselves from the fatigue of hard riding.
Ferdinand, therefore, taking the advantage of his companion’s
absence—for the Tyrolese had walked abroad to view the town—found means
to hire a peasant, who undertook to conduct him through a by-road as
far as Chalons, and with his guide he accordingly set out on horseback,
after having discharged the bill, left a blank paper sealed up in form
of a letter, directed to his friend, and secured behind his own saddle
a pair of leathern bags, in which his jewels and cash were usually
contained. So eager was our hero to leave the Tyrolese at a
considerable distance behind, that he rode all night at a round pace
without halting, and next morning found himself at a village distant
thirteen good leagues from any part of the route which he and his
companion had at first resolved to pursue.

Here, thinking himself safely delivered from the cause of all his
apprehension, he determined to lie incognito for a few days, so as that
he might run no risk of an accidental meeting upon the road with the
person whose company he had forsaken; and accordingly took possession
of an apartment, in which he went to rest, desiring his guide to wake
him when dinner should be ready. Having enjoyed a very comfortable
refreshment of sleep, with his bags under his pillow, he was summoned,
according to his direction, and ate a very hearty meal, with great
tranquillity and internal satisfaction. In the afternoon he amused
himself with happy presages and ideal prospects of his future fortune,
and, in the midst of these imaginary banquets, was seized with an
inclination of realising his bliss, and regaling his eyesight with the
fruits of that success which had hitherto attended his endeavours. Thus
inflamed, he opened the repository, and, O reader! what were his
reflections, when, in lieu of Mademoiselle Melvil’s ear-rings and
necklace, the German’s golden chain, divers jewels of considerable
value, the spoils of sundry dupes, and about two hundred ducats in
ready money, he found neither more nor less than a parcel of rusty
nails, disposed in such a manner as to resemble in weight and bulk the
moveables he had lost.

It is not to be supposed our adventurer made this discovery without
emotion. If the eternal salvation of mankind could have been purchased
for the tenth part of his treasure, he would have left the whole
species in a state of reprobation, rather than redeem them at that
price, unless he had seen in the bargain some evident advantage to his
own concerns. One may, therefore, easily conceive with what milkiness
of resignation he bore the loss of the whole, and saw himself reduced
from such affluence to the necessity of depending upon about twenty
ducats, and some loose silver, which he carried in his pocket, for his
expense upon the road. However bitter this pill might be in swallowing,
he so far mastered his mortification, as to digest it with a good
grace. His own penetration at once pointed out the canal through which
this misfortune had flowed upon him; he forthwith placed the calamity
to the account of the Tyrolese, and never doubting that he had retired
with the booty across the Rhine, into some place to which he knew
Fathom would not follow his footsteps, he formed the melancholy
resolution of pursuing with all despatch his journey to Paris, that he
might, with all convenient expedition, indemnify himself for the
discomfiture he had sustained.

With regard to his confederate, his conjecture was perfectly right;
that adventurer, though infinitely inferior to our hero in point of
genius and invention, had manifestly the advantage of him in the
articles of age and experience; he was no stranger to Fathom’s
qualifications, the happy exertion of which he had often seen. He knew
him to be an economist of the most frugal order, consequently concluded
his finances were worthy of examination; and, upon the true principles
of a sharper, eased him of the encumbrance, taking it for granted,
that, in so doing, he only precluded Ferdinand from the power of acting
the same tragedy upon him, should ever opportunity concur with his
inclination. He had therefore concerted his measures with the dexterity
of an experienced conveyancer, and, snatching the occasion, while our
hero, travel-tainted, lay sunk in the arms of profound repose, he
ripped up the seams of the leather depository, withdrew the contents,
introduced the parcel of nails, which he had made up for the purpose,
and then repaired the breach with great deliberation.

Had Fathom’s good genius prompted him to examine his effects next
morning, the Tyrolese, in all probability, would have maintained his
acquisition by force of arms; for his personal courage was rather more
determined than that of our adventurer, and he was conscious of his own
ascendency in this particular; but his good fortune prevented such
explanation. Immediately after dinner, he availed himself of his
knowledge, and, betaking himself to a remote part of the town, set out
in a post-chaise for Luneville, while our hero was meditating his own
escape.

Fathom’s conception was sufficient to comprehend the whole of this
adventure, as soon as his chagrin would give his sagacity fair play;
nor would he allow his resolution to sink under the trial; on the
contrary, he departed from the village that same afternoon, under the
auspices of his conductor, and found himself benighted in the midst of
a forest, far from the habitations of men. The darkness of the night,
the silence and solitude of the place, the indistinct images of the
trees that appeared on every side, “stretching their extravagant arms
athwart the gloom,” conspired, with the dejection of spirits occasioned
by his loss, to disturb his fancy, and raise strange phantoms in his
imagination. Although he was not naturally superstitious, his mind
began to be invaded with an awful horror, that gradually prevailed over
all the consolations of reason and philosophy; nor was his heart free
from the terrors of assassination. In order to dissipate these
disagreeable reveries, he had recourse to the conversation of his
guide, by whom he was entertained with the history of divers travellers
who had been robbed and murdered by ruffians, whose retreat was in the
recesses of that very wood.

In the midst of this communication, which did not at all tend to the
elevation of our hero’s spirits, the conductor made an excuse for
dropping behind, while our traveller jogged on in expectation of being
joined again by him in a few minutes. He was, however, disappointed in
that hope; the sound of the other horse’s feet by degrees grew more and
more faint, and at last altogether died away. Alarmed at this
circumstance, Fathom halted in the middle of the road, and listened
with the most fearful attention; but his sense of hearing was saluted
with nought but the dismal sighings of the trees, that seemed to
foretell an approaching storm. Accordingly, the heavens contracted a
more dreary aspect, the lightning began to gleam, and the thunder to
roll, and the tempest, raising its voice to a tremendous roar,
descended in a torrent of rain.

In this emergency, the fortitude of our hero was almost quite overcome.
So many concurring circumstances of danger and distress might have
appalled the most undaunted breast; what impression then must they have
made upon the mind of Ferdinand, who was by no means a man to set fear
at defiance! Indeed, he had well-nigh lost the use of his reflection,
and was actually invaded to the skin, before he could recollect himself
so far as to quit the road, and seek for shelter among the thickets
that surrounded him. Having rode some furlongs into the forest, he took
his station under a tuft of tall trees, that screened him from the
storm, and in that situation called a council within himself, to
deliberate upon his next excursion. He persuaded himself that his guide
had deserted him for the present, in order to give intelligence of a
traveller to some gang of robbers with whom he was connected; and that
he must of necessity fall a prey to those banditti, unless he should
have the good fortune to elude their search, and disentangle himself
from the mazes of the wood.

Harrowed with these apprehensions, he resolved to commit himself to the
mercy of the hurricane, as of two evils the least, and penetrate
straightforwards through some devious opening, until he should be
delivered from the forest. For this purpose he turned his horse’s head
in a line quite contrary to the direction of the high road which he had
left, on the supposition that the robbers would pursue that track in
quest of him, and that they would never dream of his deserting the
highway, to traverse an unknown forest, amidst the darkness of such a
boisterous night. After he had continued in this progress through a
succession of groves, and bogs, and thorns, and brakes, by which not
only his clothes, but also his skin suffered in a grievous manner,
while every nerve quivered with eagerness and dismay, he at length
reached an open plain, and pursuing his course, in full hope of
arriving at some village, where his life would be safe, he descried a
rush-light at a distance, which he looked upon as the star of his good
fortune, and riding towards it at full speed, arrived at the door of a
lone cottage, into which he was admitted by an old woman, who,
understanding he was a bewildered traveller, received him with great
hospitality.

When he learned from his hostess, that there was not another house
within three leagues; that she could accommodate him with a tolerable
bed, and his horse with lodging and oats, he thanked Heaven for his
good fortune, in stumbling upon this homely habitation, and determined
to pass the night under the protection of the old cottager, who gave
him to understand, that her husband, who was a faggot-maker, had gone
to the next town to dispose of his merchandise; and that, in all
probability, he would not return till next morning, on account of the
tempestuous night. Ferdinand sounded the beldame with a thousand artful
interrogations, and she answered with such appearance of truth and
simplicity, that he concluded his person was quite secure; and, after
having been regaled with a dish of eggs and bacon, desired she would
conduct him into the chamber where she proposed he should take his
repose. He was accordingly ushered up by a sort of ladder into an
apartment furnished with a standing-bed, and almost half filled with
trusses of straw. He seemed extremely well pleased with his lodging,
which in reality exceeded his expectation; and his kind landlady,
cautioning him against letting the candle approach the combustibles,
took her leave, and locked the door on the outside.




CHAPTER TWENTY-ONE

HE FALLS UPON SCYLLA, SEEKING TO AVOID CHARYBDIS.


Fathom, whose own principles taught him to be suspicious, and ever upon
his guard against the treachery of his fellow-creatures, could have
dispensed with this instance of her care, in confining her guest to her
chamber, and began to be seized with strange fancies, when he observed
that there was no bolt on the inside of the door, by which he might
secure himself from intrusion. In consequence of these suggestions, he
proposed to take an accurate survey of every object in the apartment,
and, in the course of his inquiry, had the mortification to find the
dead body of a man, still warm, who had been lately stabbed, and
concealed beneath several bundles of straw.

Such a discovery could not fail to fill the breast of our hero with
unspeakable horror; for he concluded that he himself would undergo the
same fate before morning, without the interposition of a miracle in his
favour. In the first transports of his dread, he ran to the window,
with a view to escape by that outlet, and found his flight effectually
obstructed by divers strong bars of iron. Then his heart began to
palpitate, his hair to bristle up, and his knees to totter; his
thoughts teemed with presages of death and destruction; his conscience
rose up in judgment against him, and he underwent a severe paroxysm of
dismay and distraction. His spirits were agitated into a state of
fermentation that produced a species of resolution akin to that which
is inspired by brandy or other strong liquors, and, by an impulse that
seemed supernatural, he was immediately hurried into measures for his
own preservation.

What upon a less interesting occasion his imagination durst not
propose, he now executed without scruple or remorse. He undressed the
corpse that lay bleeding among the straw, and, conveying it to the bed
in his arms, deposited it in the attitude of a person who sleeps at his
ease; then he extinguished the light, took possession of the place from
whence the body had been removed, and, holding a pistol ready cocked in
each hand, waited for the sequel with that determined purpose which is
often the immediate production of despair. About midnight he heard the
sound of feet ascending the ladder; the door was softly opened; he saw
the shadow of two men stalking towards the bed, a dark lanthorn being
unshrouded, directed their aim to the supposed sleeper, and he that
held it thrust a poniard to his heart; the force of the blow made a
compression on the chest, and a sort of groan issued from the windpipe
of the defunct; the stroke was repeated, without producing a repetition
of the note, so that the assassins concluded the work was effectually
done, and retired for the present with a design to return and rifle the
deceased at their leisure.

Never had our hero spent a moment in such agony as he felt during this
operation; the whole surface of his body was covered with a cold sweat,
and his nerves were relaxed with an universal palsy. In short, he
remained in a trance that, in all probability, contributed to his
safety; for, had he retained the use of his senses, he might have been
discovered by the transports of his fear. The first use he made of his
retrieved recollection, was to perceive that the assassins had left the
door open in their retreat; and he would have instantly availed himself
of this their neglect, by sallying out upon them, at the hazard of his
life, had he not been restrained by a conversation he overheard in the
room below, importing, that the ruffians were going to set out upon
another expedition, in hopes of finding more prey. They accordingly
departed, after having laid strong injunctions upon the old woman to
keep the door fast locked during their absence; and Ferdinand took his
resolution without farther delay. So soon as, by his conjecture, the
robbers were at a sufficient distance from the house, he rose from his
lurking-place, moved softly towards the bed, and, rummaging the pockets
of the deceased, found a purse well stored with ducats, of which,
together with a silver watch and a diamond ring, he immediately
possessed himself without scruple; then, descending with great care and
circumspection into the lower apartment, stood before the old beldame,
before she had the least intimation of his approach.

Accustomed as she was to the trade of blood, the hoary hag did not
behold this apparition without giving signs of infinite terror and
astonishment, believing it was no other than the spirit of her second
guest, who had been murdered; she fell upon her knees and began to
recommend herself to the protection of the saints, crossing herself
with as much devotion as if she had been entitled to the particular
care and attention of Heaven. Nor did her anxiety abate, when she was
undeceived in this her supposition, and understood it was no phantom,
but the real substance of the stranger, who, without staying to upbraid
her with the enormity of her crimes, commanded her, on pain of
immediate death, to produce his horse, to which being conducted, he set
her upon the saddle without delay, and, mounting behind, invested her
with the management of the reins, swearing, in a most peremptory tone,
that the only chance she had for her life, was in directing him safely
to the next town; and that, so soon as she should give him the least
cause to doubt her fidelity in the performance of that task, he would
on the instant act the part of her executioner.

This declaration had its effect upon the withered Hecate, who, with
many supplications for mercy and forgiveness, promised to guide him in
safety to a certain village at the distance of two leagues, where he
might lodge in security, and be provided with a fresh horse, or other
convenience, for pursuing his intended route. On these conditions he
told her she might deserve his clemency; and they accordingly took
their departure together, she being placed astride upon the saddle,
holding the bridle in one hand and a switch in the other; and our
adventurer sitting on the crupper, superintending her conduct, and
keeping the muzzle of a pistol close at her ear. In this equipage they
travelled across part of the same wood in which his guide had forsaken
him; and it is not to be supposed that he passed his time in the most
agreeable reverie, while he found himself involved in the labyrinth of
those shades, which he considered as the haunts of robbery and
assassination.

Common fear was a comfortable sensation to what he felt in this
excursion. The first steps he had taken for his preservation were the
effects of mere instinct, while his faculties were extinguished or
suppressed by despair; but now, as his reflection began to recur, he
was haunted by the most intolerable apprehensions. Every whisper of the
wind through the thickets was swelled into the hoarse menaces of
murder, the shaking of the boughs was construed into the brandishing of
poniards, and every shadow of a tree became the apparition of a ruffian
eager for blood. In short, at each of these occurrences he felt what
was infinitely more tormenting than the stab of a real dagger; and at
every fresh fillip of his fear, he acted as a remembrancer to his
conductress, in a new volley of imprecations, importing, that her life
was absolutely connected with his opinion of his own safety.

Human nature could not longer subsist under such complicated terror. At
last he found himself clear of the forest, and was blessed with the
distant view of an inhabited place. He then began to exercise his
thoughts upon a new subject. He debated with himself, whether he should
make a parade of his intrepidity and public spirit, by disclosing his
achievement, and surrendering his guide to the penalty of the law; or
leave the old hag and her accomplices to the remorse of their own
consciences, and proceed quietly on his journey to Paris in undisturbed
possession of the prize he had already obtained. This last step he
determined to take, upon recollecting, that, in the course of his
information, the story of the murdered stranger would infallibly
attract the attention of justice, and, in that case, the effects he had
borrowed from the defunct must be refunded for the benefit of those who
had a right to the succession. This was an argument which our
adventurer could not resist; he foresaw that he should be stripped of
his acquisition, which he looked upon as the fair fruits of his valour
and sagacity; and, moreover, be detained as an evidence against the
robbers, to the manifest detriment of his affairs. Perhaps too he had
motives of conscience, that dissuaded him from bearing witness against
a set of people whose principles did not much differ from his own.

Influenced by such considerations, he yielded to the first importunity
of the beldame, whom he dismissed at a very small distance from the
village, after he had earnestly exhorted her to quit such an atrocious
course of life, and atone for her past crimes, by sacrificing her
associates to the demands of justice. She did not fail to vow a perfect
reformation, and to prostrate herself before him for the favour she had
found; then she betook herself to her habitation, with full purpose of
advising her fellow-murderers to repair with all despatch to the
village, and impeach our hero, who, wisely distrusting her professions,
stayed no longer in the place than to hire a guide for the next stage,
which brought him to the city of Chalons-sur-Marne.




CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO

HE ARRIVES AT PARIS, AND IS PLEASED WITH HIS RECEPTION.


He was not so smitten with the delightful situation of this ancient
town, but that he abandoned it as soon as he could procure a
post-chaise, in which he arrived at Paris, without having been exposed
to any other troublesome adventure upon the road. He took lodgings at a
certain hotel in the Fauxbourg de St. Germain, which is the general
rendezvous of all the strangers that resort to this capital; and now
sincerely congratulated himself upon his happy escape from his
Hungarian connexions, and from the snares of the banditti, as well as
upon the spoils of the dead body, and his arrival at Paris, from whence
there was such a short conveyance to England, whither he was attracted,
by far other motives than that of filial veneration for his native
soil.

He suppressed all his letters of recommendation, which he justly
concluded would subject him to a tedious course of attendance upon the
great, and lay him under the necessity of soliciting preferment in the
army, than which nothing was farther from his inclination; and resolved
to make his appearance in the character of a private gentleman, which
would supply him with opportunities of examining the different scenes
of life in such a gay metropolis, so as that he should be able to
choose that sphere in which he could move the most effectually to his
own advantage. He accordingly hired an occasional domestic, and under
the denomination of Count Fathom, which he had retained since his
elopement from Renaldo, repaired to dinner at an ordinary, to which he
was directed as a reputable place, frequented by fashionable strangers
of all nations.

He found this piece of information perfectly just; for he no sooner
entered the apartment, than his ears were saluted with a strange
confusion of sounds, among which he at once distinguished the High and
Low Dutch, barbarous French, Italian, and English languages. He was
rejoiced at this occasion of displaying his own qualifications, took
his place at one of the three long tables, betwixt a Westphalian count
and a Bolognian marquis, insinuated himself into the conversation with
his usual address, and in less than half an hour, found means to accost
a native of each different country in his own mother-tongue.

Such extensive knowledge did not pass unobserved. A French abbe, in a
provincial dialect, complimented him upon his retaining that purity in
pronunciation, which is not to be found in the speech of a Parisian.
The Bolognian, mistaking him for a Tuscan, “Sir,” said he, “I presume
you are from Florence. I hope the illustrious house of Lorrain leaves
you gentlemen of that famous city no room to regret the loss of your
own princes.” The castle of Versailles becoming the subject of
conversation, Monsieur le Compte appealed to him, as to a native
German, whether it was not inferior in point of magnificence to the
chateau of Grubenhagen. The Dutch officer, addressing himself to
Fathom, drank to the prosperity of Faderland, and asked if he had not
once served in garrison at Shenkenschans; and an English knight swore,
with great assurance, that he had frequently rambled with him at
midnight among the hundreds of Drury.

To each person he replied in a polite, though mysterious manner, which
did not fail to enhance their opinion of his good breeding and
importance; and, long before the dessert appeared, he was by all the
company supposed to be a personage of great consequence, who for some
substantial reasons, found it convenient to keep himself incognito.
This being the case, it is not to be doubted that particular civilities
were poured upon him from all quarters. He perceived their sentiments,
and encouraged them, by behaving with that sort of complaisance which
seems to be the result of engaging condescension in a character of
superior dignity and station. His affability was general but his chief
attention limited to those gentlemen already mentioned, who chanced to
sit nearest him at table; and he no sooner gave them to understand that
he was an utter stranger in Paris, than they unanimously begged to have
the honour of making him acquainted with the different curiosities
peculiar to that metropolis.

He accepted of their hospitality, accompanied them to a coffee-house in
the afternoon, from whence they repaired to the opera, and afterwards
adjourned to a noted hotel, in order to spend the remaining part of the
evening. It was here that our hero secured himself effectually in the
footing he had gained in their good graces. He in a moment saw through
all the characters of the party, and adapted himself to the humour of
each individual, without descending from that elevation of behaviour
which he perceived would operate among them in his behalf. With the
Italian he discoursed on music, in the style of a connoisseur; and
indeed had a better claim to that title than the generality of those
upon whom it is usually conferred; for he understood the art in theory
as well as in practice, and would have made no contemptible figure
among the best performers of the age.

He harangued upon taste and genius to the abbe, who was a wit and
critic, ex officio, or rather ex vestitu for a young pert Frenchman,
the very moment he puts on the petit collet, or little band, looks upon
himself as an inspired son of Apollo; and every one of the fraternity
thinks it incumbent upon him to assert the divinity of his mission. In
a word, the abbes are a set of people that bear a strong analogy to the
templars in London. Fools of each fabric, sharpers of all sorts, and
dunces of every degree, profess themselves of both orders. The templar
is, generally speaking, a prig, so is the abbe: both are distinguished
by an air of petulance and self-conceit, which holds a middle rank
betwixt the insolence of a first-rate buck and the learned pride of a
supercilious pedant. The abbe is supposed to be a younger brother in
quest of preferment in the church—the Temple is considered as a
receptacle or seminary for younger sons intended for the bar; but a
great number of each profession turn aside into other paths of life,
long before they reach these proposed goals. An abbe is often
metamorphosed into a foot soldier; a templar sometimes sinks into an
attorney’s clerk. The galleys of France abound with abbes; and many
templars may be found in our American plantations; not to mention those
who have made a public exit nearer home. Yet I would not have it
thought that my description includes every individual of those
societies. Some of the greatest scholars, politicians, and wits, that
ever Europe produced, have worn the habit of an abbe; and many of our
most noble families in England derive their honours from those who have
studied law in the Temple. The worthy sons of every community shall
always be sacred from my censure and ridicule; and, while I laugh at
the folly of particular members, I can still honour and revere the
institution.

But let us return from this comparison, which some readers may think
impertinent and unseasonable, and observe, that the Westphalian count,
Dutch officer, and English knight, were not excepted from the
particular regard and attention of our adventurer. He pledged the
German in every bumper; flattered the Hollander with compliments upon
the industry, wealth, and policy of the Seven United Provinces; but he
reserved his chief battery for his own countryman, on the supposition
that he was, in all respects, the best adapted for the purposes of a
needy gamester. Him, therefore, he cultivated with extraordinary care
and singular observance; for he soon perceived him to be a humourist,
and, from that circumstance, derived an happy presage of his own
success. The baronet’s disposition seemed to be cast in the true
English mould. He was sour, silent, and contemptuous; his very looks
indicated a consciousness of superior wealth; and he never opened his
mouth, except to make some dry, sarcastic, national reflection. Nor was
his behaviour free from that air of suspicion which a man puts on when
he believes himself in a crowd of pick-pockets, whom his caution and
vigilance set at defiance. In a word, though his tongue was silent on
the subject, his whole demeanour was continually saying, “You are all a
pack of poor lousy rascals, who have a design upon my purse. ’Tis true,
I could buy your whole generation, but I won’t be bubbled, d’ye see; I
am aware of your flattery, and upon my guard against all your knavish
pranks; and I come into your company for my own amusement only.”

Fathom having reconnoitred this peculiarity of temper, instead of
treating him with that assiduous complaisance, which he received from
the other gentlemen of the party, kept aloof from him in the
conversation, with a remarkable shyness of distant civility, and seldom
took notice of what he said, except with a view to contradict him, or
retort some of his satirical observations. This he conceived to be the
best method of acquiring his good opinion; because the Englishman would
naturally conclude he was a person who could have no sinister views
upon his fortune, else he would have chosen quite a different manner of
deportment. Accordingly, the knight seemed to bite at the hook. He
listened to Ferdinand with uncommon regard; he was even heard to
commend his remarks, and at length drank to their better acquaintance.




CHAPTER TWENTY-THREE

ACQUITS HIMSELF WITH ADDRESS IN A NOCTURNAL RIOT.


The Italian and the abbe were the first who began to grow whimsical
under the influence of the burgundy; and, in the heat of their
elevation, proposed that the company should amuse themselves during the
remaining part of the night, at the house of an obliging dame, who
maintained a troop of fair nymphs for the accommodation of the other
sex. The proposal was approved by all, except the Hollander, whose
economy the wine had not as yet invaded; and, while he retreated
soberly to his own lodgings, the rest of the society adjourned in two
coaches to the temple of love, where they were received by the
venerable priestess, a personage turned of seventy, who seemed to
exercise the functions of her calling, in despite of the most cruel
ravages of time; for age had bent her into the form of a Turkish bow.
Her head was agitated by the palsy, like the leaf of the poplar tree;
her hair fell down in scanty parcels, as white as the driven snow; her
face was not simply wrinkled, but ploughed into innumerable furrows;
her jaws could not boast of one remaining tooth; one eye distilled a
large quantity of rheum, by virtue of the fiery edge that surrounded
it; the other was altogether extinguished, and she had lost her nose in
the course of her ministration. The Delphic sibyl was but a type of
this hoary matron, who, by her figure, might have been mistaken for the
consort of Chaos, or mother of Time. Yet there was something
meritorious in her appearance, as it denoted her an indefatigable
minister to the pleasure of mankind, and as it formed an agreeable
contrast with the beauty and youth of the fair damsels that wantoned in
her train. It resembled those discords in music, which, properly
disposed, contribute to the harmony of the whole piece; or those
horrible giants, who, in the world of romance, used to guard the gates
of the castle in which the enchanted damsel was confined.

This Urganda seemed to be aware of her own importance, and perfectly
well acquainted with the human appetite; for she compelled the whole
company to undergo her embrace. Then a lacquey, in magnificent livery,
ushered them into a superb apartment, where they waited some minutes,
without being favoured with the appearance of the ladies, to the
manifest dissatisfaction of the abbe, who, sending for the gouvernante,
reprimanded her severely for her want of politesse. The old lady, who
was by no means a pattern of patience and submission, retorted his
reproaches with great emphasis and vivacity. Her eloquence flowed
altogether in the Covent Garden strain; and I question whether the
celebrated Mother Douglas herself could have made such a figure in an
extemporaneous altercation.

After having bestowed upon the abbe the epithets of saucy insignificant
pimp, she put him in mind of the good offices which he had received at
her hands; how she had supplied him with bed, board, and bedfellow, in
his greatest necessity; sent him abroad with money in his pockets—and,
in a word, cherished him in her bosom, when his own mother had
abandoned him to distress. She then reviled him for presuming to
affront her before strangers, and gave the company to understand, that
the young ladies would wait upon them as soon as they could be
confessed and receive absolution from a worthy cordelier, who was now
employed in performing that charitable office. The gentlemen were
satisfied with this remonstrance, which argued the old lady’s pious
concern for the souls that were under her care, and our adventurer
proposed an accommodation betwixt her and the abbe, who was prevailed
upon to ask her pardon, and received her blessing upon his knees.

This affair had not been long adjusted, when five damsels were
introduced in a very gay dishabille, and our hero was complimented with
the privilege of choosing his Amanda from the whole bevy. When he was
provided, the others began to pair themselves, and, unhappily, the
German count chanced to pitch upon the same nymph who had captivated
the desires of the British knight. A dispute immediately ensued; for
the Englishman made his addresses to the lady, without paying the least
regard to the priority of the other’s claim; and she, being pleased
with his attachment, did not scruple to renounce his rival, who swore
by the thunder, lightning, and sacrament, that he would not quit his
pretensions for any prince in Christendom, much less for a little
English cavalier, whom he had already honoured too much in
condescending to be his companion.

The knight, provoked at this stately declaration, which was the
immediate effect of anger and ebriety, eyed his antagonist with a most
contemptuous aspect, and advised him to avoid such comparisons for the
future. “We all know,” said he, “the importance of a German count; I
suppose your revenue amounts to three hundred rix-dollars; and you have
a chateau that looks like the ruins of an English gaol. I will bind
myself to lend you a thousand pounds upon a mortgage of your estate,
(and a bad bargain I am sure I shall have,) if I do not, in less than
two months, find a yeoman of Kent, who spends more in strong ale than
the sum-total of your yearly income; and, were the truth known, I
believe that lace upon your coat is no better than tinsel, and those
fringed ruffles, with fine Holland sleeves, tacked to a shirt of brown
canvas, so that, were you to undress yourself before the lady, you
would only expose your own poverty and pride.”

The count was so much enraged at these sarcastic observations, that his
faculty of speech was overwhelmed by his resentment; though, in order
to acquit himself of the Englishman’s imputation, he forthwith pulled
off his clothes with such fury, that his brocade waistcoat was tore
from top to bottom. The knight, mistaking his meaning, considered this
demeanour as a fair challenge, to try which was the better man in the
exercise of boxing; and, on that supposition, began to strip in his
turn, when he was undeceived by Fathom, who put the right
interpretation upon the count’s behaviour, and begged that the affair
might be compromised. By this time the Westphalian recovered the use of
his tongue, and with many threats and imprecations, desired they would
take notice how falsely he had been aspersed, and do him justice in
espousing his claim to the damsel in question.

Before the company had time or inclination to interest themselves in
the quarrel, his opponent observed that no person who was not a mere
German, would ever dream of forcing the inclinations of a pretty girl,
whom the accidents of fortune had subjected to his power; that such
compulsion was equivalent to the most cruel rape that could be
committed; and that the lady’s aversion was not at all surprising; for,
to speak his own sentiments, were he a woman of pleasure, he would as
soon grant favours to a Westphalian hog, as to the person of his
antagonist. The German, enraged at this comparison, was quite abandoned
by his patience and discretion. He called the knight an English clown,
and, swearing he was the most untoward beast of a whole nation of
mules, snatched up one of the candlesticks, which he launched at him
with such force and violence, that it sung through the air, and,
winging its flight into the ante-chamber, encountered the skull of his
own valet, who with immediate prostration received the message of his
master.

The knight, that he might not be behindhand with the Westphalian in
point of courtesy, returned the compliment with the remaining
chandelier, which also missed its mark, and, smiting a large mirror
that was fixed behind them, emitted such a crash as one might expect to
hear if a mine were sprung beneath a manufacture of glass. Both lights
being thus extinguished, a furious combat ensued in the dark; the
Italian scampered off with infinite agility, and, as he went
downstairs, desired that nobody would interpose, because it was an
affair of honour, which could not be made up. The ladies consulted
their safety in flight; Count Fathom slyly retired to one corner of the
room; while the abbe, having upon him the terrors of the commissaire,
endeavoured to appease and part the combatants, and, in the attempt,
sustained a random blow upon his nose, which sent him howling into the
other chamber, where, finding his band besmeared with his own blood, he
began to caper about the apartment, in a transport of rage and
vexation.

Meanwhile, the old gentlewoman being alarmed with the noise of the
battle, and apprehensive that it would end in murder, to the danger and
discredit of herself and family, immediately mustered up her myrmidons,
of whom she always retained a formidable band, and, putting herself at
their head, lighted them to the scene of uproar. Ferdinand, who had
hitherto observed a strict neutrality, no sooner perceived them
approach, than he leaped in between the disputants, that he might be
found acting in the character of a peacemaker; and, indeed, by this
time, victory had declared for the baronet, who had treated his
antagonist with a cross-buttock, which laid him almost breathless on
the floor. The victor was prevailed upon, by the entreaties of Fathom,
to quit the field of battle, and adjourn into another room, where, in
less than half an hour, he received a billet from the count, defying
him to single combat on the frontiers of Flanders, at an appointed time
and place. The challenge was immediately accepted by the knight, who,
being flushed with conquest, treated his adversary with great contempt.

But, next day, when the fumes of the burgundy were quite exhaled, and
the adventure recurred to his remembrance and sober reflection, he
waited upon our adventurer at his lodgings, and solicited his advice in
such a manner, as gave him to understand that he looked upon what had
happened as a drunken brawl, which ought to have no serious
consequences. Fathom foreseeing that the affair might be managed for
his own interest, professed himself of the baronet’s opinion; and,
without hesitation, undertook the office of a mediator, assuring his
principal, that his honour should suffer no stain in the course of his
negotiation.

Having received the Englishman’s acknowledgments for this instance of
friendship, he forthwith set out for the place of the German’s
habitation, and understanding he was still asleep, insisted upon his
being immediately waked, and told, that a gentleman from the chevalier
desired to see him, upon business of importance which could not be
delayed. Accordingly, his valet-de-chambre, pressed by Fathom’s
importunities and remonstrances, ventured to go in and shake the count
by the shoulder; when this furious Teutonian, still agitated by the
fever of the preceding night, leaped out of bed in a frenzy, and
seizing his sword that lay upon a table, would have severely punished
the presumption of his servant, had not he been restrained by the
entrance of Ferdinand, who, with a peremptory countenance, gave him to
understand that the valet had acted at his immediate instigation; and
that he was come, as the Englishman’s friend, to concert with him
proper measures for keeping the appointment they had made at their last
meeting.

This message effectually calmed the German, who was not a little
mortified to find himself so disagreeably disturbed. He could not help
cursing the impatience of his antagonist, and even hinting that he
would have acted more like a gentleman and good Christian, in
expressing a desire of seeing the affair accommodated, as he knew
himself to be the aggressor, consequently the first offender against
the laws of politeness and good-fellowship. Fathom, finding him in a
fit temper of mind, took the opportunity of assenting to the
reasonableness of his observation. He ventured to condemn the
impetuosity of the baronet, who, he perceived, was extremely nice and
scrupulous in the punctilios of honour; and said it was a pity that two
gentlemen should forfeit each other’s friendship, much less expose
their lives, for such a frivolous cause. “My dear count,” cried the
Westphalian, “I am charmed to find your sentiments so conformable to my
own. In an honourable cause, I despise all danger; my courage, thank
Heaven! has been manifested in many public engagements as well as in
private rencounters; but, to break with my friend, whose eminent
virtues I admire, and even to seek his life, on such a scandalous
occasion, for a little insignificant w—-e, who, I suppose, took the
advantage of our intoxication, to foment the quarrel: by Heaven! my
conscience cannot digest it.”

Having expressed himself to this purpose, he waited impatiently for the
reply of Ferdinand, who, after a pause of deliberation, offered his
services in the way of mediation; though, he observed, it was a matter
of great delicacy, and the event altogether uncertain. “Nevertheless,”
added our adventurer, “I will strive to appease the knight, who, I
hope, will be induced by my remonstrances to forget the unlucky
accident, which hath so disagreeably interrupted your mutual
friendship.” The German thanked him for this proof of his regard, which
yielded him more satisfaction on account of the chevalier than of
himself. “For, by the tombs of my fathers,” cried he, “I have so little
concern for my personal safety, that, if my honour were interested, I
durst oppose myself singly to the whole ban of the empire; and I am now
ready, if the chevalier requires it, to give him the rendezvous in the
forest of Senlis, either on horseback or on foot, where this contest
may be terminated with the life of one or both of us.”

Count Fathom, with a view to chastise the Westphalian for this
rhodomontade, told him, with a mortifying air of indifference, that if
they were both bent upon taking the field, he would save himself the
trouble of interposing farther in the affair; and desired to know the
hour at which it would suit him to take the air with the baronet. The
other, not a little embarrassed by this question, said, with a
faltering tongue, he should be proud to obey the chevalier’s orders;
but, at the same time, owned he should be much better pleased if our
hero would execute the pacific proposal he had made. Fathom accordingly
promised to exert himself for that purpose, and returned to the knight,
with whom he assumed the merit of having tranquillised the rage of an
incensed barbarian, who was now disposed to a reconciliation upon equal
terms. The baronet overwhelmed him with caresses and compliments upon
his friendship and address; the parties met that same forenoon, as if
by accident, in Fathom’s apartment, where they embraced each other
cordially, exchanged apologies, and renewed their former
correspondence.

Our adventurer thought he had good reason to congratulate himself upon
the part he had acted in this pacification. He was treated by both with
signal marks of particular affection and esteem. The count pressed him
to accept, as a token of his attachment, a sword of very curious
workmanship, which he had received in a present from a certain prince
of the empire. The knight forced upon his finger a very splendid
diamond ring, as a testimony of his gratitude and esteem. But there was
still another person to be appeased, before the peace of the whole
company could be established. This was no other than the abbe, from
whom each of the reconciled friends received at dinner a billet couched
in these words:—

“I have the honour to lament the infinite chagrin and mortification
that compels me to address myself in this manner to a person of your
rank and eminence, whom I should do myself the pleasure of waiting upon
in person, were I not prevented by the misfortune of my nose, which was
last night most cruelly disarranged, by a violent contusion I had the
honour to receive, in attempting to compose that unhappy fracas, at the
house of Madame la Maquerelle; and what puts the finishing stroke to my
mishap, is my being rendered incapable of keeping three or four
assignations with ladies of fashion, by whom I have the honour to be
particularly esteemed. The disfiguration of my nose, the pain I have
undergone, with the discomposure of brain which it produced, I could
bear as a philosopher; but the disappointment of the ladies, my glory
will not permit me to overlook. And as you know the injury was
sustained in your service, I have the pleasure to hope you will not
refuse to grant such reparation as will be acceptable to a gentleman,
who has the honour to be with inviolable attachment,—


Sir, your most devoted slave,
PEPIN CLOTHAIRE CHARLE HENRI LOOUIS BARNABE DE FUMIER.”


This epistle was so equivocal, that the persons to whom it was
addressed did not know whether or not they ought to interpret the
contents into a challenge; when our hero observed, that the ambiguity
of his expressions plainly proved there was a door left open for
accommodation; and proposed that they should forthwith visit the writer
at his own apartment. They accordingly followed his advice, and found
the abbe in his morning gown and slippers, with three huge nightcaps on
his head, and a crape hat-band tied over the middle of his face, by way
of bandage to his nose. He received his visitors with the most
ridiculous solemnity, being still a stranger to the purport of their
errand; but soon as the Westphalian declared they were come in
consequence of his billet, in order to ask pardon for the undesigned
offence they had given, his features retrieved their natural vivacity,
and he professed himself perfectly satisfied with their polite
acknowledgment. Then they condoled him upon the evil plight of his
nose, and seeing some marks upon his shirt, asked with seeming concern,
if he had lost any blood in the fray? To this interrogation he replied,
that he had still a sufficient quantity left for the occasions of his
friends; and that he should deem it his greatest glory to expend the
last drop of it in their service.

Matters being thus amicably adjusted, they prevailed upon him to unease
his nose, which retained no signs of the outrage he had suffered; and
the amusements of the day were concerted. It was in consequence of this
plan, that, after the comedy, they were entertained at the count’s
lodgings, where quadrille was proposed by the abbe, as the most
innocent pastime, and the proposal was immediately embraced by all
present, and by none with more alacrity than by our adventurer, who,
without putting forth a moiety of his skill, went home with twenty
louis clear gain. Though, far from believing himself greatly superior
to the rest of the party, in the artifices of play, he justly suspected
that they had concealed their skill, with a view of stripping him on
some other occasion; for he could not suppose that persons of their
figure and character should be, in reality, such novices as they
affected to appear.




CHAPTER TWENTY-FOUR

HE OVERLOOKS THE ADVANCES OF HIS FRIENDS, AND SMARTS SEVERELY FOR HIS
NEGLECT.


Steeled with this cautious maxim, he guarded himself from their united
endeavours, in sundry subsequent attacks, by which his first conjecture
was confirmed, and still came off conqueror, by virtue of his
unparalleled finesse and discretion; till at length they seemed to
despair of making him their prey, and the count began to drop some
hints, importing a desire of seeing him more closely united to the
views and interest of their triumvirate. But Ferdinand, who was
altogether selfish, and quite solitary in his prospects, discouraged
all those advances, being resolved to trade upon his own bottom only,
and to avoid all such connexions with any person or society whatever;
much more, with a set of raw adventurers whose talents he despised.
With these sentiments, he still maintained the dignity and reserve of
his first appearance among them, and rather enhanced than diminished
that idea of importance which he had inspired at the beginning;
because, besides his other qualifications, they gave him credit for the
address with which he kept himself superior to their united designs.

While he thus enjoyed his pre-eminence, together with the fruits of his
success at play, which he managed so discreetly as never to incur the
reputation of an adventurer, he one day chanced to be at the ordinary,
when the company was surprised by the entrance of such a figure as had
never appeared before in that place. This was no other than a person
habited in the exact uniform of an English jockey. His leathern cap,
cut bob, fustian frock, flannel waistcoat, buff breeches, hunting-boots
and whip, were sufficient of themselves to furnish out a phenomenon for
the admiration of all Paris. But these peculiarities were rendered
still more conspicuous by the behaviour of the man who owned them. When
he crossed the threshold of the outward door, he produced such a sound
from the smack of his whip, as equalled the explosion of an ordinary
cohorn; and then broke forth into the halloo of a foxhunter, which he
uttered with all its variations, in a strain of vociferation that
seemed to astonish and confound the whole assembly, to whom he
introduced himself and his spaniel, by exclaiming, in a tone something
less melodious than the cry of mackerel or live cod, “By your leave,
gentlevolks, I hope there’s no offence, in an honest plain Englishman’s
coming with money in his pocket, to taste a bit of your Vrench frigasee
and ragooze.”

This declaration was made in such a wild, fantastical manner, that the
greatest part of the company mistook him for some savage monster or
maniac, and consulted their safety by starting up from table, and
drawing their swords. The Englishman, seeing such a martial apparatus
produced against him, recoiled two or three steps, saying, “Waunds! a
believe the people are all bewitched. What, do they take me for a beast
of prey? is there nobody here that knows Sir Stentor Stile, or can
speak to me in my own lingo?” He had no sooner pronounced these words,
than the baronet, with marks of infinite surprise, ran towards him,
crying, “Good Heaven! Sir Stentor, who expected to meet with you in
Paris?” Upon which, the other eyeing him very earnestly, “Odds
heartlikins!” cried he, “my neighbour, Sir Giles Squirrel, as I am a
living soul!” With these words he flew upon him like a tiger, kissed
him from ear to ear, demolished his periwig, and disordered the whole
economy of his dress, to the no small entertainment of the company.

Having well-nigh stifled his countryman with embraces, and besmeared
himself with pulville from head to foot, he proceeded in this manner,
“Mercy upon thee, knight, thou art so transmographied, and bedaubed,
and bedizened, that thou mought rob thy own mother without fear of
information. Look ye here now, I will be trussed, if the very bitch
that was brought up in thy own bosom knows thee again. Hey, Sweetlips,
here hussy, d—n the tuoad, dos’t n’t know thy old measter? Ey, ey, thou
may’st smell till Christmas, I’ll be bound to be hanged, knight, if the
creature’s nose an’t foundered by the d——d stinking perfumes you have
got among you.”

These compliments being passed, the two knights sat down by one
another, and Sir Stentor being asked by his neighbour, upon what errand
he had crossed the sea, gave him to understand, that he had come to
France, in consequence of a wager with Squire Snaffle, who had laid a
thousand pounds, that he, Sir Stentor, would not travel to Paris by
himself, and for a whole month appear every day at a certain hour in
the public walks, without wearing any other dress than that in which he
saw him. “The fellor has got no more stuff in his pate,” continued this
polite stranger, “than a jackass, to think I could not find my way
hither thof I could not jabber your French lingo. Ecod! the people of
this country are sharp enough to find out your meaning, when you want
to spend anything among them; and, as for the matter of dress,
bodikins! for a thousand pound, I would engage to live in the midst of
them, and show myself without any clothes at all. Odds heart! a
true-born Englishman needs not be ashamed to show his face, nor his
backside neither, with the best Frenchman that ever trod the ground.
Thof we Englishmen don’t beplaister our doublets with gold and silver,
I believe as how we have our pockets better lined than most of our
neighbours; and for all my bit of a fustian frock, that cost me in all
but forty shillings, I believe, between you and me, knight, I have more
dust in my fob, than all those powdered sparks put together. But the
worst of the matter is this; here is no solid belly-timber in this
country. One can’t have a slice of delicate sirloin, or nice buttock of
beef, for love nor money. A pize upon them! I could get no eatables
upon the ruoad, but what they called bully, which looks like the flesh
of Pharaoh’s lean kine stewed into rags and tatters; and then their
peajohn, peajohn, rabbet them! One would think every old woman of this
kingdom hatched pigeons from her own body.”

It is not to be supposed that such an original sat unobserved. The
French and other foreigners, who had never been in England, were struck
dumb with amazement at the knight’s appearance and deportment; while
the English guests were overwhelmed with shame and confusion, and kept
a most wary silence, for fear of being recognised by their countryman.
As for our adventurer, he was inwardly transported with joy at sight of
this curiosity. He considered him as a genuine, rich country booby, of
the right English growth, fresh as imported; and his heart throbbed
with rapture, when he heard Sir Stentor value himself upon the lining
of his pockets. He foresaw, indeed, that the other knight would
endeavour to reserve him for his own game; but he was too conscious of
his own accomplishments to think he should find great difficulty in
superseding the influence of Sir Giles.

Meanwhile, the new-comer was by his friend helped to some ragout, which
pleased his palate so well, that he declared he should now make a
hearty meal, for the first time since he had crossed the water; and,
while his good-humour prevailed, he drank to every individual around
the table. Ferdinand seized this opportunity of insinuating himself
into his favour, by saying in English, he was glad to find there was
anything in France that was agreeable to Sir Stentor. To this
compliment the knight replied with an air of surprise: “Waunds! I find
here’s another countryman of mine in this here company. Sir, I am proud
to see you with all my heart.” So speaking, he thrust out his right
hand across the table, and shook our hero by the fist, with such
violence of civility, as proved very grievous to a French marquis, who,
in helping himself to soup, was jostled in such a manner, as to
overturn the dividing-spoon in his own bosom. The Englishman, seeing
the mischief he had produced, cried, “No offence, I hope,” in a tone of
vociferation, which the marquis in all probability misconstrued; for he
began to model his features into a very sublime and peremptory look,
when Fathom interpreted the apology, and at the same time informed Sir
Stentor, that although he himself had not the honour of being an
Englishman, he had always entertained a most particular veneration for
the country, and learned the language in consequence of that esteem.

“Blood!” answered the knight, “I think myself the more obliged to you
for your kind opinion, than if you was my countryman in good earnest.
For there be abundance of we English—no offence, Sir Giles—that seem to
be ashamed of their own nation, and leave their homes to come and spend
their fortunes abroad, among a parcel of—you understand me, sir—a word
to the wise, as the saying is.”—Here he was interrupted by an article
of the second course, that seemed to give him great disturbance. This
was a roasted leveret, very strong of the fumet, which happened to be
placed directly under his nose. His sense of smelling was no sooner
encountered by the effluvia of this delicious fare, than he started up
from table, exclaiming, “Odd’s my liver! here’s a piece of carrion,
that I would not offer to e’er a hound in my kennel; ’tis enough to
make any Christian vomit both gut and gall;” and indeed by the wry
faces he made while he ran to the door, his stomach seemed ready to
justify this last assertion.

The abbe, who concluded, from these symptoms of disgust, that the
leveret was not sufficiently stale, began to exhibit marks of
discontent, and desired that it might be brought to the other end of
the table for his examination. He accordingly hung over it with the
most greedy appetite, feasting his nostrils with the steams of animal
putrefaction; and at length declared that the morceau was passable,
though he owned it would have been highly perfect, had it been kept
another week. Nevertheless, mouths were not wanting to discuss it,
insipid as it was; for in three minutes there was not a vestige to be
seen of that which had offended the organs of Sir Stentor, who now
resumed his place, and did justice to the dessert. But what he seemed
to relish better than any other part of the entertainment, was the
conversation of our adventurer, whom, after dinner, he begged to have
the honour of treating with a dish of coffee, to the seeming
mortification of his brother knight, over which Fathom exulted in his
own heart.

In short, our hero, by his affability and engaging deportment,
immediately gained possession of Sir Stentor’s good graces, insomuch,
that he desired to crack a bottle with him in the evening, and they
repaired to an auberge, whither his fellow-knight accompanied him, not
without manifest signs of reluctance. There the stranger gave a loose
to jollity; though at first he d—-ed the burgundy as a poor thin
liquor, that ran through him in a twinkling, and, instead of warming,
cooled his heart and bowels. However, it insensibly seemed to give the
lie to his imputation; for his spirits rose to a more elevated pitch of
mirth and good-fellowship; he sung, or rather roared, the Early Horn,
so as to alarm the whole neighbourhood, and began to slabber his
companions with a most bear-like affection. Yet whatever haste he made
to the goal of ebriety, he was distanced by his brother baronet, who
from the beginning of the party had made little other use of his mouth
than to receive the glass, and now sunk down upon the floor, in a state
of temporary annihilation.

He was immediately carried to bed by the direction of Ferdinand, who
now saw himself in a manner possessor of that mine to which he had made
such eager and artful advances. That he might, therefore, carry on the
approaches in the same cautious manner, he gradually shook off the
trammels of sobriety, gave a loose to that spirit of freedom which good
liquor commonly inspires, and, in the familiarity of drunkenness, owned
himself head of a noble family of Poland, from which he had been
obliged to absent himself on account of an affair of honour, not yet
compromised.

Having made this confession, and laid strong injunctions of secrecy
upon Sir Stentor, his countenance seemed to acquire from every
succeeding glass a new symptom of intoxication. They renewed their
embraces, swore eternal friendship from that day, and swallowed fresh
bumpers, till both being in all appearance quite overpowered, they
began to yawn in concert, and even nod in their chairs. The knight
seemed to resent the attacks of slumber, as so many impertinent
attempts to interrupt their entertainment; he cursed his own propensity
to sleep, imputing it to the d—-ed French climate, and proposed to
engage in some pastime that would keep them awake. “Odd’s flesh!” cried
the Briton, “when I’m at home, I defy all the devils in hell to fasten
my eyelids together, if so be as I’m otherwise inclined. For there’s
mother and sister Nan, and brother Numps and I, continue to divert
ourselves at all-fours, brag, cribbage, tetotum, husslecap, and
chuck-varthing, and, thof I say it, that should n’t say it, I won’t
turn my back to e’er a he in England, at any of these pastimes. And so,
Count, if you are so disposed, I am your man, that is, in the way of
friendship, at which of these you shall please to pitch upon.”

To this proposal Fathom replied, he was quite ignorant of all the games
he had mentioned; but, in order to amuse Sir Stentor, he would play
with him at lansquenet, for a trifle, as he had laid it down for a
maxim, to risk nothing considerable at play. “Waunds!” answered the
knight, “I hope you don’t think I come here in quest of money. Thank
God! I have a good landed estate worth five thousand a year, and owe no
man a halfpenny; and I question whether there be many counts in your
nation—no offence, I hope—that can say a bolder word. As for your
lambskin net, I know nothing of the matter; but I will toss up with you
for a guinea, cross or pile, as the saying is; or, if there’s such a
thing in this country as a box and dice, I love to hear the bones
rattle sometimes.”

Fathom found some difficulty in concealing his joy at the mention of
this last amusement, which had been one of his chief studies, and in
which he had made such progress, that he could calculate all the
chances with the utmost exactness and certainty. However, he made shift
to contain himself within due bounds, and, with seeming indifference,
consented to pass away an hour at hazard, provided the implements could
be procured. Accordingly, the landlord was consulted, and their desire
gratified; the dice were produced, and the table resounded with the
effects of their mutual eagerness. Fortune, at first, declared for the
Englishman, who was permitted by our adventurer to win twenty broad
pieces; and he was so elated with his success, as to accompany every
lucky throw with a loud burst of laughter, and other savage and simple
manifestations of excessive joy, exclaiming, in a tone something less
sweet than the bellowing of a bull, “Now for the main, Count,—odd! here
they come—here are the seven black stars, i’faith. Come along, my
yellow boys—odd’s heart! I never liked the face of Lewis before.”

Fathom drew happy presages from these boyish raptures, and, after
having indulged them for some time, began to avail himself of his
arithmetic, in consequence of which the knight was obliged to refund
the greatest part of his winning. Then he altered his note, and became
as intemperate in his chagrin, as he had been before immoderate in his
mirth. He cursed himself and his whole generation, d—-ed his bad luck,
stamped with his feet upon the floor, and challenged Ferdinand to
double stakes. This was a very welcome proposal to our hero, who found
Sir Stentor just such a subject as he had long desired to encounter
with; the more the Englishman laid, the more he lost, and Fathom took
care to inflame his passions, by certain well-timed sarcasms upon his
want of judgment, till at length he became quite outrageous, swore the
dice were false, and threw them out at the window; pulled off his
periwig, and committed it to the flames, spoke with the most rancorous
contempt of his adversary’s skill, insisted upon his having stripped
many a better man, for all he was a Count, and threatening that, before
they parted, he should not only look like a Pole, but also smell like a
pole-cat.

This was a spirit which our adventurer industriously kept up, observing
that the English were dupes to all the world; and that, in point of
genius and address, they were no more than noisy braggadocios. In
short, another pair of dice was procured, the stakes were again raised,
and, after several vicissitudes, fortune declared so much in favour of
the knight, that Fathom lost all the money in his pocket, amounting to
a pretty considerable sum. By this time he was warmed into uncommon
eagerness and impatience; being equally piqued at the success and
provoking exultations of his antagonist, whom he now invited to his
lodgings, in order to decide the contest. Sir Stentor complied with
this request; the dispute was renewed with various success, till,
towards daylight, Ferdinand saw this noisy, raw, inexperienced
simpleton, carry off all his ready cash, together with his jewels, and
almost everything that was valuable about his person; and, to crown the
whole, the victor at parting told him with a most intolerable sneer,
that as soon as the Count should receive another remittance from
Poland, he would give him his revenge.




CHAPTER TWENTY-FIVE

HE BEARS HIS FATE LIKE A PHILOSOPHER; AND CONTRACTS ACQUAINTANCE WITH A
VERY REMARKABLE PERSONAGE.


This was a proper subject for our hero to moralise upon; and
accordingly it did not pass without his remarks; he found himself
fairly foiled at his own weapons, reduced to indigence in a foreign
land, and, what he chiefly regretted, robbed of all those gay
expectations he had indulged from his own supposed excellence in the
wiles of fraud; for, upon a little recollection, he plainly perceived
he had fallen a sacrifice to the confederacy he had refused to join;
and did not at all doubt that the dice were loaded for his destruction.
But, instead of beating his head against the wall, tearing his hair,
imprecating vain curses upon himself, or betraying other frantic
symptoms of despair, he resolved to accommodate himself to his fate,
and profit by the lesson he had so dearly bought.

With this intention, he immediately dismissed his valet, quitted his
lodgings, retired to an obscure street on the other side of the river,
and, covering one eye with a large patch of black silk, presented
himself in quality of a musician to the director of the opera, who,
upon hearing a trial of his skill, received him into the band without
further question. While he continued in this situation, he not only
improved his taste and execution in music, but likewise found frequent
opportunities to extend his knowledge of mankind; for, besides the
employment he exercised in public, he was often concerned in private
concerts that were given in the hotels of noblemen; by which means he
became more and more acquainted with the persons, manners, and
characters of high life, which he contemplated with the most
industrious attention, as a spectator, who, being altogether
unconcerned in the performance, is at more liberty to observe and enjoy
the particulars of the entertainment.

It was in one of those assemblies he had the pleasure of seeing his
friend Sir Stentor, dressed in the most fashionable manner, and
behaving with all the overstrained politesse of a native Frenchman. He
was accompanied by his brother knight and the abbe; and this
triumvirate, even in Fathom’s hearing, gave a most ludicrous detail of
the finesse they had practised upon the Polish Count, to their
entertainer, who was ambassador from a certain court, and made himself
extremely merry with the particulars of the relation. Indeed, they made
shift to describe some of the circumstances in such a ridiculous light,
that our adventurer himself, smarting as he was with the disgrace,
could not help laughing in secret at the account. He afterwards made it
his business to inquire into the characters of the two British knights,
and understood they were notorious sharpers, who had come abroad for
the good of their country, and now hunted in couple among a French
pack, that dispersed themselves through the public ordinaries, walks,
and spectacles, in order to make a prey of incautious strangers.

The pride of Ferdinand was piqued at this information; and he was even
animated with the desire of making reprisals upon this fraternity, from
which he ardently longed to retrieve his honour and effects. But the
issue of his last adventure had reinforced his caution; and, for the
present, he found means to suppress the dictates of his avarice and
ambition; resolving to employ his whole penetration in reconnoitring
the ground, before he should venture to take the field again. He
therefore continued to act the part of a one-eyed fiddler, under the
name of Fadini, and lived with incredible frugality, that he might save
a purse for his future operations. In this manner had he proceeded for
the space of ten months, during which he acquired a competent knowledge
of the city of Paris, when his curiosity was attracted by certain
peculiarities in the appearance of a man who lived in one of the upper
apartments belonging to the house in which he himself had fixed his
habitation.

This was a tall, thin, meagre figure, with a long black beard, an
aquiline nose, a brown complexion, and a most piercing vivacity in his
eyes. He seemed to be about the age of fifty, wore the Persian habit,
and there was a remarkable severity in his aspect and demeanour. He and
our adventurer had been fellow-lodgers for some time, and, according to
the laudable custom in these days, had hitherto remained as much
estranged to one another, as if they had lived on opposite sides of the
globe; but of late the Persian seemed to regard our hero with
particular attention; when they chanced to meet on the staircase, or
elsewhere, he bowed to Ferdinand with great solemnity, and complimented
him with the pas. He even proceeded, in the course of this
communication, to open his mouth, and salute him with a good-morrow,
and sometimes made the common remarks upon the weather. Fathom, who was
naturally complaisant, did not discourage these advances. On the
contrary, he behaved to him with marks of particular respect, and one
day desired the favour of his company to breakfast.

This invitation the stranger declined with due acknowledgment, on
pretence of being out of order; and, in the meantime, our adventurer
bethought himself of questioning the landlord concerning his outlandish
guest. His curiosity was rather inflamed than satisfied with the
information he could obtain from this quarter; for all he learned was,
that the Persian went by the name of Ali Beker, and that he had lived
in the house for the space of four months, in a most solitary and
parsimonious manner, without being visited by one living soul; that,
for some time after his arrival, he had been often heard to groan
dismally in the night, and even to exclaim in an unknown language, as
if he had laboured under some grievous affliction; and though the first
transports of his grief had subsided, it was easy to perceive he still
indulged a deep-rooted melancholy; for the tears were frequently
observed to trickle down his beard. The commissaire of the quarter had
at first ordered this Oriental to be watched in his outgoings,
according to the maxims of the French police; but his life was found so
regular and inoffensive, that this precaution was soon set aside.

Any man of humane sentiments, from the knowledge of these particulars,
would have been prompted to offer his services to the forlorn stranger;
but as our hero was devoid of all these infirmities of human nature, it
was necessary that other motives should produce the same effect. His
curiosity, therefore, joined with the hopes of converting the
confidence of Ali to his own emolument, effectually impelled him
towards his acquaintance; and, in a little time, they began to relish
the conversation of each other. For, as the reader may have already
observed, Fathom possessed all the arts of insinuation, and had
discernment enough to perceive an air of dignity in the Persian, which
the humility of his circumstances could not conceal. He was, moreover,
a man of good understanding, not without a tincture of letters,
perfectly well bred, though in a ceremonious style, extremely moral in
his discourse, and scrupulously nice in his notions of honour.

Our hero conformed himself in all respects to the other’s opinions, and
managed his discretion so as to pass upon him for a gentleman reduced
by misfortunes to the exercise of an employment which was altogether
unsuitable to his birth and quality. He made earnest and repeated
tenders of his good offices to the stranger, and pressed him to make
use of his purse with such cordial perseverance, that, at length, Ali’s
reserve was overcome, and he condescended to borrow of him a small sum,
which in all probability, saved his life; for he had been driven to the
utmost extremity of want before he would accept of this assistance.

Fathom, having gradually stole into his good graces, began to take
notice of many piteous sighs that escaped him in the moments of their
intercourse, and seemed to denote an heart fraught with woe; and, on
pretence of administering consolation and counsel, begged leave to know
the cause of his distress, observing, that his mind would be
disburdened by such communication, and, perhaps, his grief alleviated
by some means which they might jointly concert and execute in his
behalf.

Ali, thus solicited, would often shake his head, with marks of extreme
sorrow and despondence, and, while the tears gushed from his eyes,
declared that his distress was beyond the power of any remedy but
death, and that, by making our hero his confidant, he should only
extend his unhappiness to a friend, without feeling the least remission
of his own torture. Notwithstanding these repeated declarations,
Ferdinand, who was well enough acquainted with the mind of man to know
that such importunity is seldom or never disagreeable, redoubled his
instances, together with his expressions of sympathy and esteem, until
the stranger was prevailed upon to gratify his curiosity and
benevolence. Having, therefore, secured the chamber door one night,
while all the rest of the family were asleep, the unfortunate Ali
disclosed himself in these words.




CHAPTER TWENTY-SIX

THE HISTORY OF THE NOBLE CASTILIAN.


I should be ungrateful, as well as unwise, did I longer resist the
desire you express to know the particulars of that destiny which hath
driven me to this miserable disguise, and rendered me in all
considerations the most wretched of men. I have felt your friendship,
am confident of your honour, and though my misfortunes are such as can
never be repaired, because I am utterly cut off from hope, which is the
wretch’s last comfort, yet I may, by your means, be enabled to bear
them with some degree of fortitude and resignation.

Know then, my name is not Ali; neither am I of Persian extraction. I
had once the honour to own myself a Castilian, and was, under the
appellation of Don Diego de Zelos, respected as the head of one of the
most ancient families of that kingdom. Judge, then, how severe that
distress must be, which compels a Spaniard to renounce his country, his
honours, and his name. My youth was not spent in inglorious ease,
neither did it waste unheeded in the rolls of fame. Before I had
attained the age of nineteen, I was twice wounded in battle. I once
fortunately recovered the standard of the regiment to which I belonged,
after it had been seized by the enemy; and, at another occasion, made
shift to save the life of my colonel, when he lay at the mercy of an
enraged barbarian.

He that thinks I recapitulate these particulars out of ostentation,
does wrong to the unhappy Don Diego de Zelos, who, in having performed
these little acts of gallantry, thinks he has done nothing, but simply
approved himself worthy of being called a Castilian. I mean only to do
justice to my own character, and to make you acquainted with one of the
most remarkable incidents of my life. It was my fate, during my third
campaign, to command a troop of horse in the regiment of Don Gonzales
Orgullo, between whom and my father a family feud had long been
maintained with great enmity; and that gentleman did not leave me
without reason to believe he rejoiced at the opportunity of exercising
his resentment upon his adversary’s son; for he withheld from me that
countenance which my fellow-officers enjoyed, and found means to
subject me to divers mortifications, of which I was not at liberty to
complain. These I bore in silence for some time, as part of my
probation in the character of a soldier; resolved, nevertheless, to
employ my interest at court for a removal into another corps, and to
take some future opportunity of explaining my sentiments to Don
Gonzales upon the injustice of his behaviour.

While I animated myself with these sentiments against the
discouragements I underwent, and the hard duty to which I was daily
exposed, it was our fate to be concerned in the battle of Saragossa,
where our regiment was so severely handled by the English infantry,
that it was forced to give ground with the loss of one half of its
officers and men. Don Gonzales, who acted as brigadier in another wing,
being informed of our fate, and dreading the disgrace of his corps,
which had never turned back to the enemy, put spurs to his horse, and,
riding across the field at full speed, rallied our broken squadrons,
and led us back to the charge with such intrepidity of behaviour, as
did not fail to inspire us all with uncommon courage and alacrity. For
my own part, I thought myself doubly interested to distinguish my
valour, not only on account of my own glory, but likewise on the
supposition, that, as I was acting under the eye of Gonzales, my
conduct would be narrowly observed.

I therefore exerted myself with unusual vigour, and as he began the
attack with the remains of my troop, fought close by his side during
the rest of the engagement. I even acquired his applause in the very
heat of battle. When his hat was struck off, and his horse fell under
him, I accommodated and remounted him upon my own, and, having seized
for my own use another that belonged to a common trooper, attended this
stern commander as before, and seconded him in all his repeated
efforts; but it was impossible to withstand the numbers and impetuosity
of the foe, and Don Gonzales having had the mortification to see his
regiment cut in pieces, and the greatest part of the army routed, was
fain to yield to the fortune of the day; yet he retired as became a man
of honour and a Castilian; that is, he marched off with great
deliberation in the rear of the Spanish troops, and frequently faced
about to check the pursuit of the enemy. Indeed, this exercise of his
courage had well-nigh cost him his life; for, in one of those
wheelings, he was left almost alone, and a small party of the
Portuguese horse had actually cut off our communication with the
retreating forces of Spain.

In this dilemma, we had no other chance of saving our lives and
liberty, than that of opening a passage sword in hand; and this was
what Gonzales instantly resolved to attempt. We accordingly recommended
our souls to God, and, charging the line abreast of one another, bore
down all opposition, and were in a fair way of accomplishing our
retreat without further danger; but the gallant Orgullo, in crossing a
ditch, had the misfortune to be thrown from his horse, and was almost
the same instant overtaken by one of the Portuguese dragoons, whose
sword was already suspended over his head, as he lay half stunned with
his fall; when I rode up, discharged a pistol in the ruffian’s brain,
and, seating my colonel on his horse, had the good fortune to conduct
him to a place of safety.

Here he was provided with such accommodation as his case required; for
he had been wounded in the battle, and dangerously bruised by his fall,
and, when all the necessary steps were taken towards his recovery, I
desired to know if he had any further commands for his service, being
resolved to join the army without delay. I thought proper to
communicate this question by message, because he had not spoke one word
to me during our retreat, notwithstanding the good office he had
received at my hands; a reserve which I attributed to his pride, and
resented accordingly. He no sooner understood my intention, than he
desired to see me in his apartment, and, as near as I can remember,
spoke to this effect:—

“Were your father Don Alonzo alive, I should now, in consequence of
your behaviour, banish every suggestion of resentment, and solicit his
friendship with great sincerity. Yes, Don Diego, your virtue hath
triumphed over that enmity I bore your house, and I upbraid myself with
the ungenerous treatment you have suffered under my command. But it is
not enough for me to withdraw that rigour which it was unjust to
exercise, and would be wicked to maintain. I must likewise atone for
the injuries you have sustained, and make some suitable acknowledgment
for that life which I have twice to-day owed to your valour and
generosity. Whatever interest I have at court shall be employed in your
behalf; and I have other designs in your favour, which shall be
disclosed in due season. Meanwhile, I desire you will still add one
obligation to the debt which I have already incurred, and carry this
billet in person to my Estifania, who, from the news of this fatal
overthrow must be in despair upon my account.”

So saying, he presented a letter, directed to his lady, which I
received in a transport of joy, with expressions suitable to the
occasion, and immediately set out for his country house, which happened
to be about thirty leagues from the spot. This expedition was equally
glorious and interesting; for my thoughts upon the road were engrossed
by the hope of seeing Don Orgullo’s daughter and heiress Antonia, who
was reported to be a young lady of great beauty, and the most amiable
accomplishments. However ridiculous it may seem for a man to conceive a
passion for an object which he hath never beheld, certain it is, my
sentiments were so much prepossessed by the fame of her qualifications,
that I must have fallen a victim to her charms, had they been much less
powerful than they were. Notwithstanding the fatigues I had undergone
in the field, I closed not an eye until I arrived at the gate of
Gonzales, being determined to precede the report of the battle, that
Madame d’Orgullo might not be alarmed for the life of her husband.

I declared my errand, and was introduced into a saloon, where I had not
waited above three minutes, when my colonel’s lady appeared, and in
great confusion received the letter, exclaiming, “Heaven grant that Don
Gonzales be well!” In reading the contents, she underwent a variety of
agitations; but, when she had perused the whole, her countenance
regained its serenity, and, regarding me with an air of ineffable
complacency, “Don Diego,” said she, “while I lament the national
calamity, in the defeat of our army, I at the same time feel the most
sincere pleasure on seeing you upon this occasion, and, according to
the directions of my dear lord, bid you heartily welcome to this house,
as his preserver and friend. I was not unacquainted with your character
before this last triumph of your virtue, and have often prayed to
Heaven for some lucky determination of that fatal quarrel which raged
so long between the family of Gonzales and your father’s house. My
prayers have been heard, the long-wished-for reconciliation is now
effected, and I hope nothing will ever intervene to disturb this happy
union.”

To this polite and affectionate declaration, I made such a reply as
became a young man, whose heart overflowed with joy and benevolence,
and desired to know how soon her answer to my commander would be ready,
that I might gratify his impatience with all possible despatch. After
having thanked me for this fresh proof of my attachment, she begged I
would retire into a chamber, and repose myself from the uncommon
fatigues I must have undergone; but, finding I persisted in the
resolution of returning to Don Gonzales, without allowing myself the
least benefit of sleep, she left me engaged in conversation with an
uncle of Don Gonzales, who lodged in the house, and gave orders that a
collation should be prepared in another apartment, while she retired to
her closet, and wrote a letter to her husband.

In less than an hour from my first arrival, I was introduced into a
most elegant dining-room, where a magnificent entertainment was served
up, and where we were joined by Donna Estifania, and her beautiful
daughter the fair Antonia, who, advancing with the most amiable
sweetness, thanked me in very warm expressions of acknowledgment, for
the generosity of my conduct towards her father. I had been ravished
with her first appearance, which far exceeded my imagination, and my
faculties were so disordered by this address, that I answered her
compliment with the most awkward confusion. But this disorder did not
turn to my prejudice in the opinion of that lovely creature, who has
often told me in the sequel, that she gave herself credit for that
perplexity in my behaviour, and that I never appeared more worthy of
her regard and affection than at that juncture, when my dress was
discomposed, and my whole person disfigured by the toils and duty of
the preceding day; for this very dishabille presented itself to her
reflection as the immediate effect of that very merit by which I was
entitled to her esteem.

Wretch that I am! to survive the loss of such an excellent woman,
endeared to my remembrance by the most tender offices of wedlock,
happily exercised for the space of five-and-twenty years! Forgive these
tears; they are not the drops of weakness, but remorse. Not to trouble
you with idle particulars, suffice it is to say, I was favoured with
such marks of distinction by Madame d’Orgullo, that she thought it
incumbent upon her to let me know she had not overacted her
hospitality, and, while we sat at table, accosted me in these words:
“You will not be surprised, Don Diego, at my expressions of regard,
which I own are unusual from a Spanish lady to a young cavalier like
you, when I communicate the contents of this letter from Don Gonzales.”
So saying, she put the billet into my hand, and I read these words, or
words to this effect:—

“AMIABLE ESTIFANIA,—You will understand that I am as well as a person
can possibly be who hath this day lived to see the army of his king
defeated. If you would know the particulars of this unfortunate action,
your curiosity will be gratified by the bearer, Don Diego de Zelos, to
whose virtue and bravery I am twice indebted for my life. I therefore
desire you will receive him with that respect and gratitude which you
shall think due for such an obligation; and, in entertaining him,
dismiss that reserve which often disgraces the Spanish hospitality. In
a word, let your own virtue and beneficence conduct you upon this
occasion, and let my Antonia’s endeavours be joined with your own in
doing honour to the preserver of her father! Adieu.”

Such a testimonial could not fail of being very agreeable to a young
soldier, who by this time had begun to indulge the transporting hope of
being happy in the arms of the adorable Antonia. I professed myself
extremely happy in having met with an opportunity of acquiring such a
degree of my colonel’s esteem, entertained them with a detail of his
personal prowess in the battle, and answered all their questions with
that moderation which every man ought to preserve in speaking of his
own behaviour. Our repast being ended, I took my leave of the ladies,
and at parting received a letter from Donna Estifania to her husband,
together with a ring of great value, which she begged I would accept,
as a token of her esteem. Thus loaded with honour and caresses, I set
out on my return for the quarters of Don Gonzales, who could scarce
credit his own eyes when I delivered his lady’s billet; for he thought
it impossible to perform such a journey in so short a time.

When he had glanced over the paper, “Don Diego,” said he, “by your
short stay one would imagine you had met with indifferent reception at
my house. I hope Estifania has not been deficient in her duty?” I
answered this question, by assuring him my entertainment had been so
agreeable in all respects, that nothing but my duty to him could have
induced me to give it up so soon. He then turned the conversation upon
Antonia, and hinted his intention of giving her in marriage to a young
cavalier, for whom he had a particular friendship. I was so much
affected by this insinuation, which seemed at once to blast all my
hopes of love and happiness, that the blood forsook my face; I was
seized with an universal trepidation, and even obliged to retire, on
pretence of being suddenly taken ill.

Though Gonzales seemed to impute this disorder to fatigue and want of
rest, he in his heart ascribed it to the true cause; and, after having
sounded my sentiments to his own satisfaction, blessed me with a
declaration, importing, that I was the person upon whom he had pitched
for a son-in-law. I will not trouble you with a repetition of what
passed on this interesting occasion, but proceed to observe, that his
intention in my favour was far from being disagreeable to his lady; and
that, in a little time, I had the good fortune to espouse the charming
Antonia, who submitted to the will of her father without reluctance.

Soon after this happy event, I was, by the influence of Don Gonzales,
joined to my own interest, promoted to the command of a regiment, and
served with honour during the remaining part of the war. After the
treaty of Utrecht, I was employed in reducing the Catalans to their
allegiance; and, in an action with those obstinate rebels had the
misfortune to lose my father-in-law, who by that time was preferred to
the rank of a major-general. The virtuous Estifania did not long
survive this melancholy accident; and the loss of these indulgent
parents made such a deep impression upon the tender heart of my
Antonia, that I took the first opportunity of removing her from a place
in which every object served to cherish her grief, to a pleasant villa
near the city of Seville, which I purchased on account of its agreeable
situation. That I might the more perfectly enjoy the possession of my
amiable partner, who could no longer brook the thoughts of another
separation, peace was no sooner re-established than I obtained leave to
resign my commission, and I wholly devoted myself to the joys of a
domestic life.

Heaven seemed to smile upon our union, by blessing us with a son, whom,
however, it was pleased to recall in his infancy, to our unspeakable
grief and mortification; but our mutual chagrin was afterwards
alleviated by the birth of a daughter, who seemed born with every
accomplishment to excite the love and admiration of mankind. Why did
nature debase such a masterpiece with the mixture of an alloy, which
hath involved herself and her whole family in perdition? But the ways
of Providence are unsearchable. She hath paid the debt of her
degeneracy; peace be with her soul! The honour of my family is
vindicated; though by a sacrifice which hath robbed me of everything
else that is valuable in life, and ruined my peace past all redemption.
Yes, my friend, all the tortures that human tyranny can inflict would
be ease, tranquillity, and delight, to the unspeakable pangs and
horrors I have felt.

But, to return from this digression.—Serafina, which was the name of
that little darling, as she grew up, not only disclosed all the natural
graces of external beauty, but likewise manifested the most engaging
sweetness of disposition, and a capacity for acquiring with ease all
the accomplishments of her sex. It is impossible to convey any adequate
idea of a parent’s raptures in the contemplation of such a fair
blossom. She was the only pledge of our love, she was presumptive
heiress to a large fortune, and likely to be the sole representative of
two noble Castilian families. She was the delight of all who saw her,
and a theme of praise for every tongue. You are not to suppose that the
education of such a child was neglected. Indeed, it wholly engrossed
the attention of me and my Antonia, and her proficiency rewarded our
care. Before she had attained the age of fifteen, she was mistress of
every elegant qualification, natural and acquired. Her person was, by
that time, the confessed pattern of beauty. Her voice was enchantingly
sweet, and she touched the lute with the most ravishing dexterity.
Heaven and earth! how did my breast dilate with joy at the thoughts of
having given birth to such perfection! how did my heart gush with
paternal fondness, whenever I beheld this ornament of my name! and what
scenes of endearing transport have I enjoyed with my Antonia, in mutual
congratulation upon our parental happiness!

Serafina, accomplished as she was, could not fail to make conquests
among the Spanish cavaliers, who are famous for sensibility in love.
Indeed, she never appeared without a numerous train of admirers; and
though we had bred her up in that freedom of conversation and
intercourse which holds a middle space between the French licence and
Spanish restraint, she was now so much exposed to the addresses of
promiscuous gallantry, that we found it necessary to retrench the
liberty of our house, and behave to our male visitants with great
reserve and circumspection, that our honour and peace might run no risk
from the youth and inexperience of our daughter.

This caution produced overtures from a great many young gentlemen of
rank and distinction, who courted my alliance, by demanding Serafina in
marriage; and from the number I had actually selected one person, who
was in all respects worthy the possession of such an inestimable prize.
His name was Don Manuel de Mendoza. His birth was noble, and his
character dignified with repeated acts of generosity and virtue. Yet,
before I would signify to him my approbation of his suit, I resolved to
inform myself whether or not the heart of Serafina was totally
unengaged, and indifferent to any other object, that I might not lay a
tyrannical restraint upon her inclinations. The result of my inquiry
was a full conviction of her having hitherto been deaf to the voice of
love; and this piece of information, together with my own sentiments in
his favour, I communicated to Don Manuel, who heard these tidings with
transports of gratitude and joy. He was immediately favoured with
opportunities of acquiring the affection of my daughter, and his
endeavours were at first received with such respectful civility, as
might have been easily warmed into a mutual passion, had not the evil
genius of our family interposed.

O my friend! how shall I describe the depravity of that unhappy
virgin’s sentiments! how recount the particulars of my own dishonour! I
that am descended from a long line of illustrious Castilians, who never
received an injury they did not revenge, but washed away every blemish
in their fame with the blood of those who attempted to stain it! In
that circumstance I have imitated the example of my glorious
progenitors, and that consideration alone hath supported me against all
the assaults of despair.

As I grudged no pains and expense in perfecting the education of
Serafina, my doors were open to every person who made an extraordinary
figure in the profession of those amusing sciences in which she
delighted. The house of Don Diego de Zelos was a little academy for
painting, poetry, and music; and Heaven decreed that it should fall a
sacrifice to its regard for these fatal and delusive arts. Among other
preceptors, it was her fate to be under the instruction of a cursed
German, who, though his profession was drawing, understood the elements
and theory of music, possessed a large fund of learning and taste, and
was a person remarkable for his agreeable conversation. This traitor,
who like you had lost one eye, I not only admitted into my house for
the improvement of my daughter, but even distinguished with particular
marks of confidence and favour, little thinking he had either
inclination or capacity to debauch the sentiments of my child. I was
rejoiced beyond measure to see with what alacrity she received his
lessons, with what avidity she listened to his discourse, which was
always equally moral, instructing, and entertaining.

Antonia seemed to vie with me in expressions of regard for this
accomplished stranger, whom she could not help supposing to be a person
of rank and family, reduced to his present situation by some
unfortunate vicissitude of fate. I was disposed to concur with this
opinion, and actually conjured him to make me his confidant, with such
protestations as left him no room to doubt my honour and beneficence;
but he still persisted in declaring himself the son of an obscure
mechanic in Bohemia; an origin to which surely no man would pretend who
had the least claim to nobility of birth. While I was thus undeceived
in my conjecture touching his birth and quality, I was confirmed in an
opinion of his integrity and moderation, and looked upon him as a man
of honour, in despite of the lowness of his pedigree. Nevertheless, he
was at bottom a most perfidious wretch, and all this modesty and
self-denial were the effects of the most villanous dissimulation, a
cloak under which he, unsuspected, robbed me of my honour and my peace.

Not to trouble you with particulars, the recital of which would tear my
heart-strings with indignation and remorse, I shall only observe, that,
by the power of his infernal insinuation, he fascinated the heart of
Serafina, brought over Antonia herself to the interests of his passion,
and at once detached them both from their duty and religion. Heaven and
earth! how dangerous, how irresistible is the power of infatuation!
While I remained in the midst of this blind security, waiting for the
nuptials of my daughter, and indulging myself with the vain prospect of
her approaching felicity, Antonia found means to protract the
negotiations of the marriage, by representing that it would be a pity
to deprive Serafina of the opportunity she then had of profiting by the
German’s instructions; and, upon that account, I prevailed upon Don
Manuel to bridle the impatience of his love.

During this interval, as I one evening enjoyed the cool air in my own
garden, I was accosted by an old duenna, who had been my nurse and
lived in the family since the time of my childhood.—“My duty,” said
she, “will no longer permit me to wink in silence at the wrongs I see
you daily suffer. Dismiss that German from your house without delay, if
you respect the glory of your name, and the rights of our holy
religion; the stranger is an abominable heretic; and, grant Heaven! he
may not have already poisoned the minds of those you hold most dear.” I
had been extremely alarmed at the beginning of this address; but,
finding the imputation limited to the article of religion, in which,
thank God, I am no bigot, I recovered my serenity of disposition,
thanked the old woman for her zeal, commended her piety, and encouraged
her to persevere in making observations on such subjects as should
concern my honour and my quiet.

We live in such a world of wickedness and fraud, that a man cannot be
too vigilant in his own defence: had I employed such spies from the
beginning, I should in all probability have been at this day in
possession of every comfort that renders life agreeable. The duenna,
thus authorised, employed her sagacity with such success, that I had
reason to suspect the German of a design upon the heart of Serafina;
but, as the presumptions did not amount to conviction, I contented
myself with exiling him from my house, under the pretext of having
discovered that he was an enemy to the Catholic church; and forthwith
appointed a day for the celebration of my daughter’s marriage with Don
Manuel de Mendoza. I could easily perceive a cloud of melancholy
overspread the faces of Serafina and her mother, when I declared these
my resolutions; but, as they made no objection to what I proposed, I
did not at that time enter into an explanation of the true motives that
influenced my conduct. Both parties were probably afraid of such
expostulation.

Meanwhile, preparations were made for the espousals of Serafina; and,
notwithstanding the anxiety I had undergone, on account of her
connexion with the German, I began to think that her duty, her glory,
had triumphed over all such low-born considerations, if ever they had
been entertained; because she, and even Antonia, seemed to expect the
ceremony with resignation, though the features of both still retained
evident marks of concern, which I willingly imputed to the mutual
prospect of their separation. This, however, was but a faithless calm,
that soon, ah! too soon, brought forth a tempest which hath wrecked my
hopes.

Two days before the appointed union of Don Manuel and Serafina, I was
informed by the duenna, that, while she accompanied Antonia’s
waiting-maid at church, she had seen her receive a billet from an old
woman, who, kneeling at her side, had conveyed it in such a mysterious
manner, as awakened the duenna’s apprehensions about her young lady;
she had therefore hastened home to communicate this piece of
intelligence, that I might have an opportunity of examining the
messenger before she could have time to deposit her trust. I could not
help shivering with fearful presages upon this occasion, and even
abhorring the person to whose duty and zeal I was beholden for the
intelligence, even while I endeavoured to persuade myself that the
inquiry would end in the detection of some paltry intrigue between the
maid and her own gallant. I intercepted her in returning from church,
and, commanding her to follow me to a convenient place, extorted from
her, by dint of threats, the fatal letter, which I read to this
effect:—

“The whole business of my life, O divine Serafina! will be to repay
that affection I have been so happy as to engage. With what transport
then shall I obey your summons, in performing that enterprise, which
will rescue you from the bed of a detested rival, and put myself in
full possession of a jewel which I value infinitely more than life!
Yes, adorable creature! I have provided everything for our escape, and
at midnight will attend you in your own apartment, from whence you
shall be conveyed into a land of liberty and peace, where you will,
unmolested, enjoy the purity of that religion you have espoused, and in
full security bless the arms of your ever faithful, ORLANDO.”

Were you a fond parent, a tender husband, and a noble Castilian, I
should not need to mention the unutterable horrors that took possession
of my bosom, when I perused this accursed letter, by which I learned
the apostasy, disobedience, and degeneracy of my idolised Serafina, who
had overthrown and destroyed the whole plan of felicity which I had
erected, and blasted all the glories of my name; and when the wretched
messenger, terrified by my menaces and agitation, confessed that
Antonia herself was privy to the guilt of her daughter, whom she had
solemnly betrothed to that vile German, in the sight of Heaven, and
that by her connivance this plebeian intended, that very night, to
bereave me of my child, I was for some moments stupefied with grief and
amazement, that gave way to an ecstasy of rage, which had well-nigh
terminated in despair and distraction.

I now tremble, and my head grows giddy with the remembrance of that
dreadful occasion. Behold how the drops trickle down my forehead; this
agony is a fierce and familiar visitant; I shall banish it anon. I
summoned my pride, my resentment, to my assistance; these are the
cordials that support me against all other reflections; those were the
auxiliaries that enabled me, in the day of trial, to perform that
sacrifice which my honour demanded, in a strain so loud as to drown the
cries of nature, love, and compassion. Yes, they espoused that glory
which humanity would have betrayed, and my revenge was noble, though
unnatural.

My scheme was soon laid, my resolution soon taken; I privately confined
the wretch who had been the industrious slave of this infamous
conspiracy, that she might take no step to frustrate or interrupt the
execution of my design. Then repairing to the house of an apothecary
who was devoted to my service, communicated my intention, which he
durst not condemn, and could not reveal, without breaking the oath of
secrecy I had imposed; and he furnished me with two vials of poison for
the dismal catastrophe I had planned. Thus provided, I, on pretence of
sudden business at Seville, carefully avoided the dear, the wretched
pair, whom I had devoted to death, that my heart might not relent, by
means of those tender ideas which the sight of them would have
infallibly inspired; and, when daylight vanished, took my station near
that part of the house through which the villain must have entered on
his hellish purpose. There I stood, in a state of horrid expectation,
my soul ravaged with the different passions that assailed it, until the
fatal moment arrived; when I perceived the traitor approach the window
of a lower apartment, which led into that of Serafina, and gently
lifting the casement, which was purposely left unsecured, insinuated
half of his body into the house. Then rushing upon him, in a transport
of fury, I plunged my sword into his heart, crying, “Villain! receive
the reward of thy treachery and presumption.”

The steel was so well aimed as to render a repetition of the stroke
unnecessary; he uttered one groan, and fell breathless at my feet.
Exulting with this first success of my revenge, I penetrated into the
chamber where the robber of my peace was expected by the unhappy
Serafina and her mother, who, seeing me enter with a most savage
aspect, and a sword reeking with the vengeance I had taken, seemed
almost petrified with fear. “Behold,” said I, “the blood of that base
plebeian, who made an attempt upon the honour of my house; your
conspiracy against the unfortunate Don Diego de Zelos is now
discovered; that presumptuous slave, the favoured Orlando, is now no
more.”

Scarce had I pronounced these words, when a loud scream was uttered by
both the unhappy victims. “If Orlando is slain,” cried the infatuated
Serafina, “what have I to do with life? O my dear lord! my husband, and
my lover! how are our promised joys at once cut off! here, strike, my
father! complete your barbarous sacrifice! the spirit of the murdered
Orlando still hovers for his wife.” These frantic exclamations, in
which she was joined by Antonia, kept up the fury of my resentment,
which by meekness and submission might have been weakened and rendered
ineffectual. “Yes, hapless wretches,” I replied, “ye shall enjoy your
wish: the honour of my name requires that both shall die; yet I will
not mangle the breast of Antonia, on which I have so often reposed; I
will not shed the blood of Zelos, nor disfigure the beauteous form of
Serafina, on which I have so often gazed with wonder and unspeakable
delight. Here is an elixir, to which I trust the consummation of my
revenge.”

So saying, I emptied the vials into separate cups, and, presenting one
in each hand, the miserable, the fair offenders instantly received the
destined draughts, which they drank without hesitation; then praying to
heaven for the wretched Don Diego, sunk upon the same couch, and
expired without a groan. O well-contrived beverage! O happy
composition, by which all the miseries of life are so easily cured!

Such was the fate of Antonia and Serafina; these hands were the
instruments that deprived them of life, these eyes beheld them the
richest prize that death had ever won. Powers supreme! does Don Diego
live to make this recapitulation? I have done my duty; but ah! I am
haunted by the furies of remorse; I am tortured with the incessant
stings of remembrance and regret; even now the images of my wife and
daughter present themselves to my imagination. All the scenes of
happiness I have enjoyed as a lover, husband, and parent, all the
endearing hopes I have cherished, now pass in review before me,
embittering the circumstances of my inexpressible woe; and I consider
myself as a solitary outcast from all the comforts of society. But,
enough of these unmanly complaints; the yearnings of nature are too
importunate.

Having completed my vengeance, I retired into my closet, and,
furnishing myself with some ready money and jewels of considerable
value, went into the stable, saddled my favourite steed, which I
instantly mounted, and, before the tumults of my breast subsided, found
myself at the town of St. Lucar. There I learned from inquiry, that
there was a Dutch bark in the harbour ready to sail; upon which I
addressed myself to the master, who, for a suitable gratification, was
prevailed upon to weigh anchor that same night; so that, embarking
without delay, I soon bid eternal adieu to my native country. It was
not from reason and reflection that I took these measures for my
personal safety; but, in consequence of an involuntary instinct, that
seems to operate in the animal machine, while the faculty of thinking
is suspended.

To what a dreadful reckoning was I called, when reason resumed her
function! You may believe me, my friend, when I assure you, that I
should not have outlived those tragedies I acted, had I not been
restrained from doing violence upon myself by certain considerations,
which no man of honour ought to set aside. I could not bear the thought
of falling ingloriously by the hand of an executioner, and entailing
disgrace upon a family that knew no stain; and I was deterred from
putting an end to my own misery, by the apprehension of posthumous
censure, which would have represented me as a desponding wretch,
utterly destitute of that patience, fortitude, and resignation, which
are the characteristics of a true Castilian. I was also influenced by
religious motives that suggested to me the necessity of living to
atone, by my sufferings and sorrow, for the guilt I had incurred in
complying with a savage punctilio, which is, I fear, displeasing in the
sight of Heaven.

These were the reasons that opposed my entrance into that peaceful
harbour which death presented to my view; and they were soon reinforced
by another principle that sanctioned my determination to continue at
the servile oar of life. In consequence of unfavourable winds, our
vessel for some days made small progress in her voyage to Holland, and
near the coast of Gallicia we were joined by an English ship from Vigo,
the master of which gave us to understand, that before he set sail, a
courier had arrived from Madrid at that place, with orders for the
corregidore to prevent the escape of any native Spaniard by sea from
any port within his district; and to use his utmost endeavours to
apprehend the person of Don Diego de Zelos, who was suspected of
treasonable practices against the state. Such an order, with a minute
description of my person, was at the same time despatched to all the
seaports and frontier places in Spain.

You may easily suppose how I, who was already overwhelmed with
distress, could bear this aggravation of misfortune and disgrace: I,
who had always maintained the reputation of loyalty, which was acquired
at the hazard of my life, and the expense of my blood. To deal
candidly, I must own, that this intelligence roused me from a lethargy
of grief which had begun to overpower my faculties. I immediately
imputed this dishonourable charge to the evil offices of some villain,
who had basely taken the advantage of my deplorable situation, and I
was inflamed, inspirited with the desire of vindicating my fame, and
revenging the injury. Thus animated, I resolved to disguise myself
effectually from the observation of those spies which every nation
finds its account in employing in foreign countries; I purchased this
habit from the Dutch navigator, in whose house I kept myself concealed,
after our arrival at Amsterdam, until my beard was grown to a
sufficient length to favour my design, and then appeared as a Persian
dealer in jewels. As I could gain no satisfactory information touching
myself in this country, had no purpose to pursue, and was extremely
miserable among a people, who, being mercenary and unsocial, were very
ill adapted to alleviate the horrors of my condition, I gratified my
landlord for his important services, with the best part of my effects;
and having, by his means, procured a certificate from the magistracy,
repaired to Rotterdam, from whence I set out in a travelling carriage
for Antwerp, on my way to this capital; hoping, with a succession of
different objects, to mitigate the anguish of my mind, and by the most
industrious inquiry, to learn such particulars of that false
impeachment, as would enable me to take measures for my own
justification, as well as for projecting a plan of revenge against the
vile perfidious author.

This, I imagined, would be no difficult task, considering the
friendship and intercourse subsisting between the Spanish and French
nations, and the communicative disposition for which the Parisians are
renowned; but I have found myself egregiously deceived in my
expectation. The officers of police in this city are so inquisitive and
vigilant that the most minute action of a stranger is scrutinised with
great severity; and, although the inhabitants are very frank in
discoursing on indifferent subjects, they are at the same time
extremely cautious in avoiding all conversation that turns upon state
occurrences and maxims of government. In a word, the peculiarity of my
appearance subjects me so much to particular observation, that I have
hitherto thought proper to devour my griefs in silence, and even to
bear the want of almost every convenience, rather than hazard a
premature discovery, by offering my jewels to sale.

In this emergency I have been so far fortunate as to become acquainted
with you, whom I look upon as a man of honour and humanity. Indeed, I
was at first sight prepossessed in your favour, for, notwithstanding
the mistakes which men daily commit in judging from appearances, there
is something in the physiognomy of a stranger from which one cannot
help forming an opinion of his character and disposition. For once, my
penetration hath not failed me; your behaviour justifies my decision;
you have treated me with that sympathy and respect which none but the
generous will pay to the unfortunate. I have trusted you accordingly. I
have put my life, my honour, in your power; and I must beg leave to
depend upon your friendship, for obtaining that satisfaction for which
alone I seek to live. Your employment engages you in the gay world; you
daily mingle with the societies of men; the domestics of the Spanish
ambassador will not shun your acquaintance; you may frequent the
coffee-houses to which they resort; and, in the course of these
occasions, unsuspected inform yourself of that mysterious charge which
lies heavy on the fame of the unfortunate Don Diego. I must likewise
implore your assistance in converting my jewels into money, that I may
breathe independent of man, until Heaven shall permit me to finish this
weary pilgrimage of life.




CHAPTER TWENTY-SEVEN

A FLAGRANT INSTANCE OF FATHOM’S VIRTUE, IN THE MANNER OF HIS RETREAT TO
ENGLAND.


Fathom, who had lent an attentive ear to every circumstance of this
disastrous story, no sooner heard it concluded, than, with an aspect of
generous and cordial compassion, not even unattended with tears, he
condoled the lamentable fate of Don Diego de Zelos, deplored the
untimely death of the gentle Antonia and the fair Serafina, and
undertook the interest of the wretched Castilian with such warmth of
sympathising zeal, as drew a flood from his eyes, while he wrung his
benefactor’s hand in a transport of gratitude. Those were literally
tears of joy, or at least of satisfaction, on both sides; as our hero
wept with affection and attachment to the jewels that were to be
committed to his care; but, far from discovering the true source of his
tenderness, he affected to dissuade the Spaniard from parting with the
diamonds, which he counselled him to reserve for a more pressing
occasion; and, in the meantime, earnestly entreated him to depend upon
his friendship for present relief.

This generous proffer served only to confirm Don Diego’s resolution,
which he forthwith executed, by putting into the hands of Ferdinand
jewels to the value of a thousand crowns, and desiring him to detain
for his own use any part of the sum they would raise. Our adventurer
thanked him for the good opinion he entertained of his integrity, an
opinion fully manifested in honouring him with such important
confidence, and assured him he would transact his affairs with the
utmost diligence, caution, and despatch. The evening being by this time
almost consumed, these new allies retired separately to rest; though
each passed the night without repose, in very different reflections,
the Castilian being, as usual, agitated with the unceasing pangs of his
unalterable misery, interspersed with gleaming hopes of revenge; and
Fathom being kept awake with revolving plans for turning his
fellow-lodger’s credulity to his own advantage. From the nature of the
Spaniard’s situation, he might have appropriated the jewels to himself,
and remained in Paris without fear of a prosecution, because the
injured party had, by the above narrative, left his life and liberty at
discretion.—But he did not think himself secure from the personal
resentment of an enraged desperate Castilian; and therefore determined
to withdraw himself privately into that country where he had all along
proposed to fix the standard of his finesse, which fortune had now
empowered him to exercise according to his wish.

Bent upon this retreat, he went abroad in the morning, on pretence of
acting in the concerns of his friend Don Diego, and having hired a
post-chaise to be ready at the dawning of next day, returned to his
lodgings, where he cajoled the Spaniard with a feigned report of his
negotiation; then, securing his most valuable effects about his person,
arose with the cock, repaired to the place at which he had appointed to
meet the postillion with the carriage, and set out for England without
further delay, leaving the unhappy Zelos to the horrors of indigence,
and the additional agony of this fresh disappointment. Yet he was not
the only person affected by the abrupt departure of Fathom, which was
hastened by the importunities, threats, and reproaches of his
landlord’s daughter, whom he had debauched under promise of marriage,
and now left in the fourth month of her pregnancy.

Notwithstanding the dangerous adventure in which he had been formerly
involved by travelling in the night, he did not think proper to make
the usual halts on this journey, for sleep or refreshment, nor did he
once quit the chaise till his arrival at Boulogne, which he reached in
twenty hours after his departure from Paris. Here he thought he might
safely indulge himself with a comfortable meal; accordingly he bespoke
a poulard for dinner, and while that was preparing, went forth to view
the city and harbour. When he beheld the white cliffs of Albion, his
heart throbbed with all the joy of a beloved son, who, after a tedious
and fatiguing voyage, reviews the chimneys of his father’s house. He
surveyed the neighbouring coast of England with fond and longing eyes,
like another Moses, reconnoitring the land of Canaan from the top of
Mount Pisgah; and to such a degree of impatience was he inflamed by the
sight, that, instead of proceeding to Calais, he resolved to take his
passage directly from Boulogne, even if he should hire a vessel for the
purpose. With these sentiments, he inquired if there was any ship bound
for England, and was so fortunate as to find the master of a small
bark, who intended to weigh anchor for Deal that same evening at high
water.

Transported with this information, he immediately agreed for his
passage, sold the post-chaise to his landlord for thirty guineas, as a
piece of furniture for which he could have no further use, purchased a
portmanteau, together with some linen and wearing apparel, and, at the
recommendation of his host, took into his service an extra postillion
or helper, who had formerly worn the livery of a travelling marquis.
This new domestic, whose name was Maurice, underwent, with great
applause, the examination of our hero, who perceived in him a fund of
sagacity and presence of mind, by which he was excellently qualified
for being the valet of an adventurer. He was therefore accommodated
with a second-hand suit and another shirt, and at once listed under the
banners of Count Fathom, who spent the whole afternoon in giving him
proper instructions for the regulation of his conduct.

Having settled these preliminaries to his own satisfaction, he and his
baggage were embarked about six o’clock in the month of September, and
it was not without emotion that he found himself benighted upon the
great deep, of which, before the preceding day, he had never enjoyed
even the most distant prospect. However, he was not a man to be afraid,
where there was really no appearance of danger; and the agreeable
presages of future fortune supported his spirits, amidst the
disagreeable nausea which commonly attends landsmen at sea, until he
was set ashore upon the beach at Deal, which he entered in good health
about seven o’clock in the morning.

Like Caesar, however, he found some difficulty in landing, on account
of the swelling surf, that tumbled about with such violence as had
almost overset the cutter that carried him on shore; and, in his
eagerness to jump upon the strand, his foot slipped from the side of
the boat, so that he was thrown forwards in an horizontal direction,
and his hands were the first parts of him that touched English ground.
Upon this occasion, he, in imitation of Scipio’s behaviour on the coast
of Africa, hailed the omen, and, grasping a handful of the sand, was
heard to exclaim, in the Italian language: “Ah, ah, Old England, I have
thee fast.”

As he walked up to the inn, followed by Maurice loaded with his
portmanteau, he congratulated himself upon his happy voyage, and the
peaceable possession of his spoil, and could not help snuffing up the
British air with marks of infinite relish and satisfaction. His first
care was to recompense himself for the want of sleep he had undergone,
and, after he had sufficiently recruited himself with several hours of
uninterrupted repose, he set out in a post-chaise for Canterbury, where
he took a place in the London stage, which he was told would depart
next morning, the coach being already full. On this very first day of
his arrival, he perceived between the English and the people among whom
he had hitherto lived, such essential difference in customs,
appearance, and way of living, as inspired him with high notions of
that British freedom, opulence, and convenience, on which he had often
heard his mother expatiate. On the road, he feasted his eyesight with
the verdant hills covered with flocks of sheep, the fruitful vales
parcelled out into cultivated enclosures; the very cattle seemed to
profit by the wealth of their masters, being large, sturdy, and sleek,
and every peasant breathed the insolence of liberty and independence.
In a word, he viewed the wide-extended plains of Kent with a lover’s
eye, and, his ambition becoming romantic, could not help fancying
himself another conqueror of the isle.

He was not, however, long amused by these vain chimeras, which soon
vanished before other reflections of more importance and solidity. His
imagination, it must be owned, was at all times too chaste to admit
those overweening hopes, which often mislead the mind of the projector.
He had studied mankind with incredible diligence, and knew perfectly
well how far he could depend on the passions and foibles of human
nature. That he might now act consistent with his former sagacity, he
resolved to pass himself upon his fellow-travellers for a French
gentleman, equally a stranger to the language and country of England,
in order to glean from their discourse such intelligence as might avail
him in his future operations; and his lacquey was tutored accordingly.




CHAPTER TWENTY-EIGHT

SOME ACCOUNT OF HIS FELLOW-TRAVELLERS.


Those who had taken places for the coach, understanding the sixth seat
was engaged by a foreigner, determined to profit by his ignorance; and,
with that politeness which is peculiar to this happy island, fixed
themselves in the vehicle, in such a manner, before he had the least
intimation of their design, that he found it barely practicable to
insinuate himself sidelong between a corpulent quaker and a fat Wapping
landlady, in which attitude he stuck fast, like a thin quarto between
two voluminous dictionaries on a bookseller’s shelf. And, as if the
pain and inconvenience of such compression was not sufficient matter of
chagrin, the greatest part of the company entertained themselves with
laughing at his ludicrous station.

The jolly dame at his left hand observed, with a loud exclamation of
mirth, that monsieur would be soon better acquainted with a buttock of
English beef; and said, by that time they should arrive at their
dining-place, he might be spitted without larding. “Yes, verily,”
replied Obadiah, who was a wag in his way, “but the swine’s fat will be
all on one side.”—“So much the better for you,” cried mine hostess,
“for that side is all your own.” The quaker was not so much
disconcerted by the quickness of this repartee, but that he answered
with great deliberation, “I thank thee for thy love, but will not
profit by thy loss, especially as I like not the savour of these
outlandish fowls; they are profane birds of passage, relished only by
the children of vanity, like thee.”

The plump gentlewoman took umbrage at this last expression, which she
considered as a double reproach, and repeated the words, “Children of
vanity!” with an emphasis of resentment. “I believe, if the truth were
known,” said she, “there’s more vanity than midriff in that great belly
of yours, for all your pretending to humility and religion. Sirrah! my
corporation is made up of good, wholesome, English fat; but you are
puffed up with the wind of vanity and delusion; and when it begins to
gripe your entrails, you pretend to have a motion, and then get up and
preach nonsense. Yet you’ll take it upon you to call your betters
children. Marry come up, Mr. Goosecap, I have got children that are as
good men as you, or any hypocritical trembler in England.”

A person who sat opposite to the quaker, hearing this remonstrance,
which seemed pregnant with contention, interposed in the conversation
with a conscious leer, and begged there might be no rupture between the
spirit and the flesh. By this remonstrance he relieved Obadiah from the
satire of this female orator, and brought the whole vengeance of her
elocution upon his own head. “Flesh!” cried she, with all the ferocity
of an enraged Thalestris; “none of your names, Mr. Yellowchaps. What! I
warrant you have an antipathy to flesh, because you yourself are
nothing but skin and bone. I suppose you are some poor starved
journeyman tailor come from France, where you have been learning to
cabbage, and have not seen a good meal of victuals these seven years.
You have been living upon rye-bread and soup-maigre, and now you come
over like a walking atomy with a rat’s tail at your wig, and a tinsey
jacket. And so, forsooth, you set up for a gentleman, and pretend to
find fault with a sirloin of roast beef.”

The gentleman heard this address with admirable patience, and when she
had rung out her alarm, very coolly replied, “Anything but your
stinking fish madam. Since when, I pray, have you travelled in
stage-coaches, and left off your old profession of crying oysters in
winter, and rotten mackerel in June? You was then known by the name of
Kate Brawn, and in good repute among the ale-houses in Thames Street,
till that unlucky amour with the master of a corn-vessel, in which he
was unfortunately detected by his own spouse; but you seem to have
risen by that fall; and I wish you joy of your present plight. Though,
considering your education on Bear Quay, you can give but a sorry
account of yourself.”

The Amazon, though neither exhausted nor dismayed, was really
confounded at the temper and assurance of this antagonist, who had
gathered all these anecdotes from the fertility of his own invention;
after a short pause, however, she poured forth a torrent of obloquy
sufficient to overwhelm any person who had not been used to take up
arms against such seas of trouble; and a dispute ensued, which would
have not only disgraced the best orators on the Thames, but even have
made a figure in the celebration of the Eleusinian mysteries, during
which the Athenian matrons rallied one another from different waggons,
with that freedom of altercation so happily preserved in this our age
and country.

Such a redundancy of epithets, and variety of metaphors, tropes, and
figures were uttered between these well-matched opponents, that an epic
bard would have found his account in listening to the contest; which,
in all probability, would not have been confined to words, had it not
been interrupted for the sake of a young woman of an agreeable
countenance and modest carriage; who, being shocked at some of their
flowers of speech, and terrified by the menacing looks and gestures of
the fiery-featured dame, began to scream aloud, and beg leave to quit
the coach. Her perturbation put an end to the high debate. The sixth
passenger, who had not opened his mouth, endeavoured to comfort her
with assurances of protection; the quaker proposed a cessation of arms;
the male disputant acquiesced in the proposal, assuring the company he
had entered the lists for their entertainment only, without acquiring
the least grudge or ill-will to the fat gentlewoman, whom he protested
he had never seen before that day, and who, for aught he knew, was a
person of credit and reputation. He then held forth his hand in token
of amity, and asked pardon of the offended party, who was appeased by
his submission; and, in testimony of her benevolence, presented to the
other female, whom she had discomposed, an Hungary-water bottle filled
with cherry-brandy, recommending it as a much more powerful remedy than
the sal-volatile which the other held to her nose.

Peace being thus re-established, in a treaty comprehending Obadiah and
all present, it will not be improper to give the reader some further
information, touching the several characters assembled in this vehicle.
The quaker was a London merchant, who had been at Deal superintending
the repairs of a ship which had suffered by a storm in the Downs. The
Wapping landlady was on her return from the same place, where she had
attended the payment of a man-of-war, with sundry powers of attorney,
granted by the sailors, who had lived upon credit at her house. Her
competitor in fame was a dealer in wine, a smuggler of French lace, and
a petty gamester just arrived from Paris, in the company of an English
barber, who sat on his right hand, and the young woman was daughter of
a country curate, in her way to London, where she was bound apprentice
to a milliner.

Hitherto Fathom had sat in silent astonishment at the manners of his
fellow-travellers, which far exceeded the notions he had preconceived
of English plainness and rusticity. He found himself a monument of that
disregard and contempt which a stranger never fails to meet with from
the inhabitants of this island; and saw, with surprise, an agreeable
young creature sit as solitary and unheeded as himself.

He was, indeed, allured by the roses of her complexion, and the
innocence of her aspect, and began to repent of having pretended
ignorance of the language, by which he was restrained from exercising
his eloquence upon her heart; he resolved, however, to ingratiate
himself, if possible, by the courtesy and politeness of dumb show, and
for that purpose put his eyes in motion without farther delay.




CHAPTER TWENTY-NINE

ANOTHER PROVIDENTIAL DELIVERANCE FROM THE EFFECTS OF THE SMUGGLER’S
INGENIOUS CONJECTURE.


During these deliberations, the wine merchant, with a view to make a
parade of his superior parts and breeding, as well as to pave the way
for a match at backgammon, made a tender of his snuff-box to our
adventurer, and asked, in bad French, how he travelled from Paris. This
question produced a series of interrogations concerning the place of
Ferdinand’s abode in that city, and his business in England, so that he
was fain to practise the science of defence, and answered with such
ambiguity, as aroused the suspicion of the smuggler, who began to
believe our hero had some very cogent reason for evading his curiosity;
he immediately set his reflection at work, and, after various
conjectures, fixed upon Fathom’s being the Young Pretender. Big with
this supposition, he eyed him with the most earnest attention,
comparing his features with those of the Chevalier’s portrait which he
had seen in France, and though the faces were as unlike as any two
human faces could be, found the resemblance so striking as to dispel
all his doubts, and persuade him to introduce the stranger to some
justice on the road; a step by which he would not only manifest his
zeal for the Protestant succession, but also acquire the splendid
reward proposed by parliament to any person who should apprehend that
famous adventurer.

These ideas intoxicated the brain of this man to such a pitch of
enthusiasm, that he actually believed himself in possession of the
thirty thousand pounds, and amused his fancy with a variety of
magnificent projects to be executed by means of that acquisition, until
his reverie was interrupted by the halting of the coach at the inn
where the passengers used to eat their breakfasts. Waked as he was from
the dream of happiness, it had made such impression upon his mind,
that, seeing Fathom rise up with an intention to alight, he took it for
granted his design was to escape, and seizing him by the collar, called
aloud for assistance in the King’s name.

Our hero, whose sagacity and presence of mind very often supplied the
place of courage, instead of being terrified at this assault, which
might have disturbed the tranquillity of an ordinary villain, was so
perfectly master of every circumstance of his own situation, as to know
at once that the aggressor could not possibly have the least cause of
complaint against him; and therefore, imputing this violence either to
madness or mistake, very deliberately suffered himself to be made
prisoner by the people of the house, who ran to the coach door in
obedience to the summons of the wine merchant. The rest of the company
were struck dumb with surprise and consternation at this sudden
adventure; and the quaker, dreading some fell resistance on the side of
the outlandish man, unpinned the other coach door in the twinkling of
an eye, and trundled himself into the mud for safety. The others,
seeing the temper and resignation of the prisoner, soon recovered their
recollection, and began to inquire into the cause of his arrest, upon
which, the captor, whose teeth chattered with terror and impatience,
gave them to understand that he was a state criminal, and demanded
their help in conveying him to justice.

Luckily for both parties, there happened to be at the inn a company of
squires just returned from the death of a leash of hares, which they
had ordered to be dressed for dinner, and among these gentlemen was one
of the quorum, to whom the accuser had immediate recourse, marching
before the captive, who walked very peaceably between the landlord and
one of his waiters, and followed by a crowd of spectators, some of whom
had secured the faithful Maurice, who in his behaviour closely imitated
the deliberation of his master. In this order did the procession
advance to the apartment in which the magistrate, with his fellows of
the chase, sat smoking his morning pipe over a tankard of strong ale,
and the smuggler being directed to the right person, “May it please
your worship,” said he, “I have brought this foreigner before you, on a
violent suspicion of his being a proclaimed outlaw; and I desire,
before these witnesses, that my title may be made good to the reward
that shall become due upon his conviction.”

“Friend,” replied the justice, “I know nothing of you or your titles;
but this I know, if you have any information to give in, you must come
to my house when I am at home, and proceed in a lawful way, that is,
d’ye mind me, if you swear as how this here person is an outlaw; then
if so be as he has nothing to say to the contrary, my clerk shall make
out a mittimus, and so to jail with him till next ’size.” “But, sir,”
answered the impeacher, “this is a case that admits of no delay; the
person I have apprehended is a prisoner of consequence to the state.”
“How, fellor!” cried the magistrate, interrupting him, “is there any
person of more consequence than one of his Majesty’s justices of the
peace, who is besides a considerable member of the landed interest!
D’ye know, sirrah, who you are talking to? If you don’t go about your
business, I believe I shall lay you by the heels.”

The smuggler, fearing his prize would escape through the ignorance,
pride, and obstinacy of this country justice, approached his worship,
and in a whisper which was overheard by all the company, assured him he
had indubitable reason to believe the foreigner was no other than the
Pretender’s eldest son. At mention of this formidable name, every
individual of the audience started, with signs of terror and amazement.
The justice dropped his pipe, recoiled upon his chair, and, looking
most ridiculously aghast, exclaimed, “Seize him, in the name of God and
his Majesty King George! Has he got no secret arms about him!”

Fathom being thus informed of the suspicion under which he stood, could
not help smiling at the eagerness with which the spectators flew upon
him, and suffered himself to be searched with great composure, well
knowing they would find no moveables about his person, but such as upon
examination would turn to his account; he therefore very calmly
presented to the magistrate his purse, and a small box that contained
his jewels, and in the French language desired they might be preserved
from the hands of the mob. This request was interpreted by the accuser,
who, at the same time, laid claim to the booty. The justice took charge
of the deposit, and one of his neighbours having undertaken the office
of clerk, he proceeded to the examination of the culprit, whose papers
were by this time laid on the table before him. “Stranger,” said he,
“you stand charged with being son of the Pretender to these realms;
what have you to say in your own defence?” Our hero assured him, in the
French language, that he was falsely impeached, and demanded justice on
the accuser, who, without the least reason, had made such a malicious
attack upon the life and honour of an innocent gentleman.

The smuggler, instead of acting the part of a faithful interpreter,
told his worship, that the prisoner’s answer was no more than a simple
denial, which every felon would make who had nothing else to plead in
his own behalf, and that this alone was a strong presumption of his
guilt, because, if he was not really the person they suspected him to
be, the thing would speak for itself, for, if he was not the Young
Pretender, who then was he? This argument had great weight with the
justice, who, assuming a very important aspect, observed, “Very true,
friend, if you are not the Pretender, in the name of God, who are you?
One may see with half an eye that he is no better than a promiscuous
fellow.”

Ferdinand now began to repent of having pretended ignorance of the
English language, as he found himself at the mercy of a rascal, who put
a false gloss upon all his words, and addressed himself to the audience
successively in French, High Dutch, Italian, and Hungarian Latin,
desiring to know if any person present understood any of these tongues,
that his answers might be honestly explained to the bench. But he might
have accosted them in Chinese with the same success: there was not one
person present tolerably versed in his mother-tongue, much less
acquainted with any foreign language, except the wine merchant, who,
incensed at this appeal, which he considered as an affront to his
integrity, gave the judge to understand, that the delinquent, instead
of speaking to the purpose, contumaciously insulted his authority in
sundry foreign lingos, which he apprehended was an additional proof of
his being the Chevalier’s son, inasmuch as no person would take the
pains to learn such a variety of gibberish, except with some sinister
intent.

This annotation was not lost upon the squire, who was too jealous of
the honour of his office to overlook such a flagrant instance of
contempt. His eyes glistened, his cheeks were inflated with rage. “The
case is plain,” said he; “having nothing of signification to offer in
his own favour, he grows refractory, and abuses the court in his base
Roman Catholic jargon; but I’ll let you know, for all you pretend to be
a prince, you are no better than an outlawed vagrant, and I’ll show you
what a thing you are when you come in composition with an English
justice, like me, who have more than once extinguished myself in the
service of my country. As nothing else accrues, your purse, black box,
and papers shall be sealed up before witnesses, and sent by express to
one of his Majesty’s secretaries of state; and, as for yourself, I will
apply to the military at Canterbury, for a guard to conduct you to
London.”

This was a very unwelcome declaration to our adventurer, who was on the
point of haranguing the justice and spectators in their own language,
when he was relieved from the necessity of taking that step by the
interposition of a young nobleman just arrived at the inn, who, being
informed of this strange examination, entered the court, and, at first
sight of the prisoner, assured the justice he was imposed upon; for
that he himself had often seen the Young Pretender in Paris, and that
there was no kind of resemblance between that adventurer and the person
now before him. The accuser was not a little mortified at his
lordship’s affirmation, which met with all due regard from the bench,
though the magistrate took notice, that, granting the prisoner was not
the Young Chevalier himself, it was highly probable he was an emissary
of that house, as he could give no satisfactory account of himself, and
was possessed of things of such value as no honest man could expose to
the accidents of the road.

Fathom, having thus found an interpreter, who signified to him, in the
French tongue, the doubts of the justice, told his lordship, that he
was a gentleman of a noble house in Germany, who, for certain reasons,
had come abroad incognito, with a view to see the world; and that,
although the letters they had seized would prove the truth of that
assertion, he should be loth to expose his private concerns to the
knowledge of strangers, if he could possibly be released without that
mortification. The young nobleman explained his desire to the court;
but, his own curiosity being interested, observed, at the same time,
that the justice could not be said to have discharged the duties of his
station, until he should have examined every circumstance relating to
the prisoner. Upon which remonstrance, he was requested by the bench to
peruse the papers, and accordingly communicated the substance of one
letter to this effect:—

“MY DEAR SON,
Though I am far from approving the rash step you have taken in
withdrawing yourself from your father’s house, in order to avoid an
engagement which would have been equally honourable and advantageous to
your family, I cannot so far suppress my affection, as to bear the
thought of your undergoing those hardships which, for your
disobedience, you deserve to suffer. I have therefore, without the
knowledge of your father, sent the bearer to attend you in your
peregrinations; his fidelity you know hath been tried in a long course
of service, and I have entrusted to his care, for your use, a purse of
two hundred ducats, and a box of jewels to the value of twice that sum,
which, though not sufficient to support an equipage suitable to your
birth, will, at least for some time, preserve you from the
importunities of want. When you are dutiful enough to explain your
designs and situation, you may expect further indulgence from your
tender and disconsolate mother,—


THE COUNTESS OF FATHOM.”


This letter, which, as well as the others, our hero had forged for the
purpose, effectually answered his intent, in throwing dust in the eyes
and understanding of the spectators, who now regarded the prisoner with
looks of respectful remorse, as a man of quality who had been falsely
accused. His lordship, to make a parade of his own politeness and
importance, assured the bench, he was no stranger to the family of the
Fathoms, and, with a compliment, gave Ferdinand to understand he had
formerly seen him at Versailles. There being no longer room for
suspicion, the justice ordered our adventurer to be set at liberty, and
even invited him to be seated, with an apology for the rude manner in
which he had been treated, owing to the misinformation of the accuser,
who was threatened with the stocks, for his malice and presumption.

But this was not the only triumph our hero obtained over the wine
merchant. Maurice was no sooner unfettered, than, advancing into the
middle of the room, “My lord,” said he, addressing himself in French to
his master’s deliverer, “since you have been so generous as to protect
a noble stranger from the danger of such a false accusation, I hope you
will still lay an additional obligation upon the Count, by retorting
the vengeance of the law upon his perfidious accuser, whom I know to be
a trader in those articles of merchandise which are prohibited by the
ordinances of this nation. I have seen him lately at Boulogne, and am
perfectly well acquainted with some persons who have supplied him with
French lace and embroidery; and, as a proof of what I allege, I desire
you will order him and this barber, who is his understrapper, to be
examined on the spot.”

This charge, which was immediately explained to the bench, yielded
extraordinary satisfaction to the spectators, one of whom, being an
officer of the customs, forthwith began to exercise his function upon
the unlucky perruquier, who, being stripped of his upper garments, and
even of his shirt, appeared like the mummy of an Egyptian king, most
curiously rolled up in bandages of rich figured gold shalloon, that
covered the skirts of four embroidered waistcoats. The merchant, seeing
his expectation so unhappily reversed, made an effort to retire with a
most rueful aspect, but was prevented by the officer, who demanded the
interposition of the civil power, that he might undergo the same
examination to which the other had been subjected. He was accordingly
rifled without loss of time, and the inquiry proved well worth the care
of him who made it; for a considerable booty of the same sort of
merchandise was found in his boots, breeches, hat, and between the
buckram and lining of his surtout. Yet, not contented with this prize,
the experienced spoiler proceeded to search his baggage, and,
perceiving a false bottom in his portmanteau, detected beneath it a
valuable accession to the plunder he had already obtained.




CHAPTER THIRTY

THE SINGULAR MANNER OF FATHOM’S ATTACK AND TRIUMPH OVER THE VIRTUE OF
THE FAIR ELENOR.


Proper cognisance being thus taken of these contraband effects, and the
informer furnished with a certificate, by which he was entitled to a
share of the seizure, the coachman summoned his passengers to the
carriage; the purse and jewels were restored to Count Fathom, who
thanked the justice, and his lordship in particular, for the candour
and hospitality with which he had been treated, and resumed his place
in the vehicle, amidst the congratulations of all his
fellow-travellers, except the two forlorn smugglers, who, instead of
re-embarking in the coach, thought proper to remain at the inn, with
view to mitigate, if possible, the severity of their misfortune.

Among those who felicitated Fathom upon the issue of this adventure,
the young maiden seemed to express the most sensible pleasure at that
event. The artful language of his eyes had raised in her breast certain
fluttering emotions, before she knew the value of her conquest; but now
that his rank and condition were discovered, these transports were
increased by the ideas of vanity and ambition, which are mingled with
the first seeds of every female constitution. The belief of having
captivated the heart of a man who could raise her to the rank and
dignity of a countess, produced such agreeable sensations in her fancy,
that her eyes shone with unusual lustre, and a continual smile played
in dimples on her rosy cheeks; so that her attractions, though not
powerful enough to engage the affection, were yet sufficient to inflame
the desire of our adventurer, who very honestly marked her chastity for
prey to his voluptuous passion. Had she been well seasoned with
knowledge and experience, and completely armed with caution against the
artifice and villany of man, her virtue might not have been able to
withstand the engines of such an assailant, considering the dangerous
opportunities to which she was necessarily exposed. How easy then must
his victory have been over an innocent, unsuspecting country damsel,
flushed with the warmth of youth, and an utter stranger to the ways of
life!

While Obadiah, therefore, and his plump companion, were engaged in
conversation, on the strange incidents which had passed, Fathom acted a
very expressive pantomime with this fair buxom nymph, who comprehended
his meaning with surprising facility, and was at so little pains to
conceal the pleasure she took in this kind of intercourse, that several
warm squeezes were interchanged between her and her lover, before they
arrived at Rochester, where they proposed to dine. It was during this
period, he learned from the answers she made to the inquisitive quaker,
that her sole dependence was upon a relation, to whom she had a letter,
and that she was a perfect stranger in the great city; circumstances on
which he soon formed the project of her ruin.

Upon their arrival at the Black Bull, he for the first time found
himself alone with his Amanda, whose name was Elenor, their
fellow-travellers being elsewhere employed about their own concerns;
and, unwilling to lose the precious opportunity, he began to act the
part of a very importunate lover, which he conceived to be a proper
sequel to the prelude which had been performed in the coach. The
freedoms which she, out of pure simplicity and good-humour, permitted
him to take with her hand, and even her rosy lips, encouraged him to
practise other familiarities upon her fair bosom, which scandalised her
virtue so much, that, in spite of the passion she had begun to indulge
in his behalf, she rejected his advances with all the marks of anger
and disdain; and he found it necessary to appease the storm he had
raised, by the most respectful and submissive demeanour; resolving to
change his operations, and carry on his attacks, so as to make her
yield at discretion, without alarming her religion or pride.
Accordingly, when the bill was called after dinner, he took particular
notice of her behaviour, and, perceiving her pull out a large leathern
purse that contained her money, reconnoitred the pocket in which it was
deposited, and, while they sat close to each other in the carriage,
conveyed it with admirable dexterity into an hole in the cushion.
Whether the corpulent couple, who sat opposite to these lovers, had
entered into an amorous engagement at the inn, or were severally
induced by other motives, is uncertain; but sure it is, both left the
coach on that part of the road which lies nearest to Gravesend, and
bade adieu to the other pair, on pretence of having urgent business at
that place.

Ferdinand, not a little pleased at their departure, renewed his most
pathetic expressions of love, and sung several French songs on that
tender subject, which seemed to thrill to the soul of his beauteous
Helen. While the driver halted at Dartford to water his horses, she was
smit with the appearance of some cheesecakes, which were presented by
the landlady of the house, and having bargained for two or three, put
her hand in her pocket, in order to pay for her purchase; but what was
her astonishment, when, after having rummaged her equipage, she
understood her whole fortune was lost! This mishap was, by a loud
shriek, announced to our hero, who affected infinite amazement and
concern; and no sooner learned the cause of her affliction, than he
presented her with his own purse, from which he, in emphatic dumb show,
begged she would indemnify herself for the damage she had sustained.
Although this kind proffer was some alleviation of her misfortunes, she
did not fail to pour forth a most piteous lamentation, importing that
she had not only lost all her money, amounting to five pounds, but also
her letter of recommendation, upon which she had altogether relied for
present employment.

The vehicle was minutely searched from top to bottom, by herself and
our adventurer, assisted by Maurice and the coachman, who, finding
their inquiry ineffectual, did not scruple to declare his suspicion of
the two fat turtles who had deserted the coach in such an abrupt
manner. In a word, he rendered this conjecture so plausible, by
wresting the circumstances of their behaviour and retreat, that poor
Elenor implicitly believed they were the thieves by whom she had
suffered; and was prevailed upon to accept the proffered assistance of
the generous Count, who, seeing her very much disordered by this
mischance, insisted upon her drinking a large glass of canary, to quiet
the perturbation of her spirits. This is a season, which of all others
is most propitious to the attempts of an artful lover; and justifies
the metaphorical maxim of fishing in troubled waters. There is an
affinity and short transition betwixt all the violent passions that
agitate the human mind. They are all false perspectives, which, though
they magnify, yet perplex and render indistinct every object which they
represent. And flattery is never so successfully administered, as to
those who know they stand in need of friendship, assent, and
approbation.

The cordial she swallowed, far from calming, increased the disturbance
of her thoughts, and produced an intoxication; during which, she talked
in an incoherent strain, laughed and wept by turns, and acted other
extravagances, which are known to be symptoms of the hysterical
affection. Fathom, though an utter stranger to the sentiments of
honour, pity, and remorse, would not perpetrate his vicious purpose,
though favoured by the delirium his villany had entailed upon this
unfortunate young maiden; because his appetite demanded a more perfect
sacrifice than that which she could yield in her present deplorable
situation, when her will must have been altogether unconcerned in his
success. Determined, therefore, to make a conquest of her virtue,
before he would take possession of her person, he mimicked that
compassion and benevolence which his heart had never felt, and, when
the coach arrived at London, not only discharged what she owed for her
place, but likewise procured for her an apartment in the house to which
he himself had been directed for lodgings, and even hired a nurse to
attend her during a severe fever, which was the consequence of her
disappointment and despondence. Indeed, she was supplied with all
necessaries by the generosity of this noble Count, who, for the
interest of his passion, and the honour of his name, was resolved to
extend his charity to the last farthing of her own money, which he had
been wise enough to secure for this purpose.

Her youth soon got the better of her distemper, and when she understood
her obligations to the Count, who did not fail to attend her in person
with great tenderness, her heart, which had been before prepossessed in
his favour, now glowed with all the warmth of gratitude, esteem, and
affection. She knew herself in a strange place, destitute of all
resource but in his generosity. She loved his person, she was dazzled
by his rank; and he knew so well how to improve the opportunities and
advantages he derived from her unhappy situation, that he gradually
proceeded in sapping from one degree of intimacy to another, until all
the bulwarks of her chastity were undermined, and she submitted to his
desire; not with the reluctance of a vanquished people, but with all
the transports of a joyful city, that opens its gates to receive a
darling prince returned from conquest. For by this time he had artfully
concentred and kindled up all the inflammable ingredients of her
constitution; and she now looked back upon the virtuous principles of
her education, as upon a disagreeable and tedious dream, from which she
had waked to the fruition of never-fading joy.




CHAPTER THIRTY-ONE

HE BY ACCIDENT ENCOUNTERS HIS OLD FRIEND, WITH WHOM HE HOLDS A
CONFERENCE, AND RENEWS A TREATY.


Our hero, having thus provided himself with a proper subject for his
hours of dalliance, thought it was now high time to study the ground
which he had pitched upon for the scene of his exploits, and with that
view made several excursions to different parts of the town, where
there was aught of entertainment or instruction to be found. Yet he
always, on these occasions, appeared in an obscure ordinary dress, in
order to avoid singularity, and never went twice to the same
coffee-house, that his person might not be afterwards known, in case he
should shine forth to the public in a superior sphere. On his return
from one of those expeditions, while he was passing through Ludgate,
his eyes were suddenly encountered by the apparition of his old friend
the Tyrolese, who, perceiving himself fairly caught in the toil, made a
virtue of necessity, and, running up to our adventurer with an aspect
of eagerness and joy, clasped him in his arms, as some dear friend,
whom he had casually found after a most tedious and disagreeable
separation.

Fathom, whose genius never failed him in such emergencies, far from
receiving these advances with the threats and reproaches which the
other had deserved at his hands, returned the salute with equal warmth,
and was really overjoyed at meeting with a person who might one way or
other make amends for the perfidy of his former conduct. The Tyrolese,
whose name was Ratchcali, pleased with his reception, proposed they
should adjourn to the next tavern, in which they had no sooner taken
possession of an apartment, than he addressed himself to his old
companion in these words:—

“Mr. Fathom, by your frank and obliging manner of treating a man who
hath done you wrong, I am more and more confirmed in my opinion of your
sagacity, which I have often considered with admiration; I will not
therefore attempt to make an apology for my conduct at our last
parting; but only assure you that this meeting may turn out to our
mutual advantage, if we now re-enter into an unreserved union, the ties
of which we will soon find it our interest and inclination to preserve.
For my own part, as my judgment is ripened by experience, so are my
sentiments changed since our last association. I have seen many a rich
harvest lost, for want of a fellow-labourer in the vineyard; and I have
more than once fallen a sacrifice to a combination, which I could have
resisted with the help of one able auxiliary. Indeed, I might prove
what I allege by mathematical demonstration; and I believe nobody will
pretend to deny, that two heads are better than one, in all cases that
require discernment and deliberation.”

Ferdinand could not help owning the sanity of his observations, and
forthwith acquiesced in his proposal of the new alliance; desiring to
know the character in which he acted on the English stage, and the
scheme he would offer for their mutual emolument. At the same time he
resolved within himself to keep such a strict eye over his future
actions, as would frustrate any design he might hereafter harbour, of
repeating the prank he had so successfully played upon him, in their
journey from the banks of the Rhine.

“Having quitted you at Bar-le-duc,” resumed the Tyrolese, “I travelled
without ceasing, until I arrived at Frankfort upon the Maine, where I
assumed the character of a French chevalier, and struck some masterly
strokes, which you yourself would not have deemed unworthy of your
invention; and my success was the more agreeable, as my operations were
chiefly carried on against the enemies of our religion. But my
prosperity was not of long duration. Seeing they could not foil me at
my own weapons, they formed a damned conspiracy, by which I not only
lost all the fruits of my industry, but likewise ran the most imminent
hazard of my life. I had ordered some of those jewels which I had
borrowed of my good friend Fathom to be new set in a fashionable taste,
and soon after had an opportunity to sell one of these, at a great
advantage, to one of the fraternity, who offered an extraordinary price
for the stone, on purpose to effect my ruin. In less than
four-and-twenty hours after this bargain, I was arrested by the
officers of justice upon the oath of the purchaser, who undertook to
prove me guilty of a fraud, in selling a Saxon pebble for a real
diamond; and this accusation was actually true; for the change had been
artfully put upon me by the jeweller, who was himself engaged in the
conspiracy.

“Had my conscience been clear of any other impeachment, perhaps I
should have rested my cause upon the equity and protection of the law;
but I foresaw that the trial would introduce an inquiry, to which I was
not at all ambitious of submitting, and therefore was fain to
compromise the affair, at the price of almost my whole fortune. Yet
this accommodation was not made so secretly, but that my character was
blasted, and my credit overthrown; so that I was fain to relinquish my
occasional equipage, and hire myself as journeyman to a lapidary, an
employment which I had exercised in my youth. In this obscure station,
I laboured with great assiduity, until I made myself perfect in the
knowledge of stones, as well as in the different methods of setting
them off to the best advantage; and having, by dint of industry and
address, got possession of a small parcel, set out for this kingdom, in
which I happily arrived about four months ago; and surely England is
the paradise of artists of our profession.

“One would imagine that nature had created the inhabitants for the
support and enjoyment of adventurers like you and me. Not that these
islanders open the arms of hospitality to all foreigners without
distinction. On the contrary, they inherit from their fathers an
unreasonable prejudice against all nations under the sun; and when an
Englishman happens to quarrel with a stranger, the first term of
reproach he uses is the name of his antagonist’s country, characterised
by some opprobrious epithet, such as a chattering Frenchman, an Italian
ape, a German hog, and a beastly Dutchman; nay, their national
prepossession is maintained even against those people with whom they
are united under the same laws and government; for nothing is more
common than to hear them exclaim against their fellow-subjects, in the
expressions of a beggarly Scot, and an impudent Irish bog-trotter. Yet
this very prejudice will never fail to turn to the account of every
stranger possessed of ordinary talents; for he will always find
opportunities of conversing with them in coffee-houses and places of
public resort, in spite of their professed reserve, which, by the bye,
is so extraordinary, that I know some people who have lived twenty
years in the same house without exchanging one word with their
next-door neighbours; yet, provided he can talk sensibly, and preserve
the deportment of a sober gentleman, in those occasional conversations,
his behaviour will be the more remarkably pleasing, as it will
agreeably disappoint the expectation of the person who had entertained
notions to his prejudice. When a foreigner has once crossed this bar,
which perpetually occurs, he sails without further difficulty into the
harbour of an Englishman’s goodwill; for the pique is neither personal
nor rancorous, but rather contemptuous and national; so that, while he
despises a people in the lump, an individual of that very community may
be one of his chief favourites.

“The English are in general upright and honest, therefore unsuspecting
and credulous. They are too much engrossed with their own business to
pry into the conduct of their neighbours, and too indifferent, in point
of disposition, to interest themselves in what they conceive to be
foreign to their own concerns. They are wealthy and mercantile, of
consequence liberal and adventurous, and so well disposed to take a
man’s own word for his importance, that they suffer themselves to be
preyed upon by such a bungling set of impostors, as would starve for
lack of address in any other country under the sun. This being a true
sketch of the British character, so far as I have been able to observe
and learn, you will easily comprehend the profits that may be extracted
from it, by virtue of those arts by which you so eminently excel;—the
great, the unbounded prospect lies before me! Indeed, I look upon this
opulent kingdom as a wide and fertile common, on which we adventurers
may range for prey, without let or molestation. For so jealous are the
natives of their liberties, that they will not bear the restraint of
necessary police, and an able artist may enrich himself with their
spoils, without running any risk of attracting the magistrate, or
incurring the least penalty of the law.

“In a word, this metropolis is a vast masquerade, in which a man of
stratagem may wear a thousand different disguises, without danger of
detection. There is a variety of shapes in which we the knights of
industry make our appearance in London. One glides into a nobleman’s
house in the capacity of a valet-de-chambre, and in a few months leads
the whole family by the nose. Another exhibits himself to the public,
as an empiric or operator for the teeth; and by dint of assurance and
affidavits, bearing testimony to wonderful cures that never were
performed, whirls himself into his chariot, and lays the town under
contribution. A third professes the composition of music, as well as
the performance, and by means of a few capriciosos on the violin,
properly introduced, wriggles himself into the management of private
and public concerts. And a fourth breaks forth at once in all the
splendour of a gay equipage, under the title and denomination of a
foreign count. Not to mention those inferior projectors, who assume the
characters of dancers, fencing-masters, and French ushers, or, by
renouncing their religion, seek to obtain a provision for life.

“Either of these parts will turn to the account of an able actor; and,
as you are equally qualified for all, you may choose that which is most
suitable to your own inclination. Though, in my opinion, you was
designed by nature to shine in the great world, which, after all, is
the most ample field for men of genius; because the game is deeper, and
people of fashion being, for the most part, more ignorant, indolent,
vain, and capricious, than their inferiors, are of consequence more
easily deceived; besides, their morals sit generally so loose about
them, that, when a gentleman of our fraternity is discovered in the
exercise of his profession, their contempt of his skill is the only
disgrace he incurs.”

Our hero was so well pleased with this picture, that he longed to
peruse the original, and, before these two friends parted, they settled
all the operations of the campaign. Ratchcali, that same evening, hired
magnificent lodgings for Count Fathom, in the court end of the town,
and furnished his wardrobe and liveries from the spoils of Monmouth
Street; he likewise enlisted another footman and valet-de-chambre into
his service, and sent to the apartments divers large trunks, supposed
to be filled with the baggage of this foreign nobleman, though, in
reality, they contained little else than common lumber.

Next day, our adventurer took possession of his new habitation, after
having left to his friend and associate the task of dismissing the
unfortunate Elenor, who was so shocked at the unexpected message, that
she fainted away; and when she recovered the use of her senses so well
as to reflect upon her forlorn condition, she was seized with the most
violent transports of grief and dismay, by which her brain was
disordered to such a degree, that she grew furious and distracted, and
was, by the advice and assistance of the Tyrolese, conveyed into the
hospital of Bethlem; where we shall leave her for the present, happily
bereft of her reason.




CHAPTER THIRTY-TWO

HE APPEARS IN THE GREAT WORLD WITH UNIVERSAL APPLAUSE AND ADMIRATION.


Meanwhile, Fathom and his engine were busied in completing his
equipage, so that in a few days he had procured a very gay chariot,
adorned with painting, gilding, and a coat of arms, according to his
own fancy and direction. The first use he made of this vehicle was that
of visiting the young nobleman from whom he had received such important
civilities on the road, in consequence of an invitation at parting, by
which he learned his title and the place of his abode in London.

His lordship was not only pleased, but proud to see such a stranger at
his gate, and entertained him with excess of complaisance and
hospitality; insomuch that, by his means, our hero soon became
acquainted with the whole circle of polite company, by whom he was
caressed for his insinuating manners and agreeable conversation. He had
thought proper to tell the nobleman, at their first interview in town,
that his reasons for concealing his knowledge of the English tongue
were now removed, and that he would no longer deny himself the pleasure
of speaking a language which had been always music to his ear. He had
also thanked his lordship for his generous interposition at the inn,
which was an instance of that generosity and true politeness which are
engrossed by the English people, who leave nought to other nations but
the mere shadow of these virtues.

A testimony like this, from the mouth of such a noble stranger, won the
heart of the peer, who professed a friendship for him on the spot, and
undertook to see justice done to his lacquey, who in a short time was
gratified with a share of the seizure which had been made upon his
information, amounting to fifty or sixty pounds.

Ferdinand put not forth the whole strength of his accomplishments at
once, but contrived to spring a new mine of qualification every day, to
the surprise and admiration of all his acquaintance. He was gifted with
a sort of elocution, much more specious than solid, and spoke on every
subject that occurred in conversation with that familiarity and ease,
which, one would think, could only be acquired by long study and
application. This plausibility and confidence are faculties really
inherited from nature, and effectually serve the possessor, in lieu of
that learning which is not to be obtained without infinite toil and
perseverance. The most superficial tincture of the arts and sciences in
such a juggler, is sufficient to dazzle the understanding of half
mankind; and, if managed with circumspection, will enable him even to
spend his life among the literati, without once forfeiting the
character of a connoisseur.

Our hero was perfectly master of this legerdemain, which he carried to
such a pitch of assurance, as to declare, in the midst of a
mathematical assembly, that he intended to gratify the public with a
full confutation of Sir Isaac Newton’s philosophy, to the nature of
which he was as much a stranger as the most savage Hottentot in Africa.
His pretensions to profound and universal knowledge were supported not
only by this kind of presumption, but also by the facility with which
he spoke so many different languages, and the shrewd remarks he had
made in the course of his travels and observation.

Among politicians, he settled the balance of power upon a certain
footing, by dint of ingenious schemes, which he had contrived for the
welfare of Europe. With officers, he reformed the art of war, with
improvements which had occurred to his reflection while he was engaged
in a military life. He sometimes held forth upon painting, like a
member of the Dilettanti club. The theory of music was a theme upon
which he seemed to expatiate with particular pleasure. In the provinces
of love and gallantry, he was a perfect Oroondates. He possessed a most
agreeable manner of telling entertaining stories, of which he had a
large collection; he sung with great melody and taste, and played upon
the violin with surprising execution. To these qualifications let us
add his affability and pliant disposition, and then the reader will not
wonder that he was looked upon as the pattern of human perfection, and
his acquaintance courted accordingly.

While he thus captivated the favour and affection of the English
nobility, he did not neglect to take other measures in behalf of the
partnership to which he had subscribed. The adventure with the two
squires at Paris had weakened his appetite for play, which was not at
all restored by the observations he had made in London, where the art
of gaming is reduced into a regular system, and its professors so
laudably devoted to the discharge of their functions, as to observe the
most temperate regimen, lest their invention should be impaired by the
fatigue of watching or exercise, and their ideas disturbed by the fumes
of indigestion. No Indian Brachman could live more abstemious than two
of the pack, who hunted in couple, and kennelled in the upper
apartments of the hotel in which our adventurer lived. They abstained
from animal food with the abhorrence of Pythagoreans, their drink was a
pure simple element, they were vomited once a week, took physic or a
glyster every third day, spent the forenoon in algebraical
calculations, and slept from four o’clock till midnight, that they
might then take the field with that cool serenity which is the effect
of refreshment and repose.

These were terms upon which our hero would not risk his fortune; he was
too much addicted to pleasure to forego every other enjoyment but that
of amassing; and did not so much depend upon his dexterity in play as
upon his talent of insinuation, which, by this time, had succeeded so
far beyond his expectation, that he began to indulge the hope of
enslaving the heart of some rich heiress, whose fortune would at once
raise him above all dependence. Indeed, no man ever set out with a
fairer prospect on such an expedition; for he had found means to render
himself so agreeable to the fair sex, that, like the boxes of the
playhouse, during the representation of a new performance, his company
was often bespoke for a series of weeks; and no lady, whether widow,
wife, or maiden, ever mentioned his name, without some epithet of
esteem or affection; such as the dear Count! the charming Man! the
Nonpareil, or the Angel!

While he thus shone in the zenith of admiration, it is not to be
doubted, that he could have melted some wealthy dowager or opulent
ward; but, being an enemy to all precipitate engagements, he resolved
to act with great care and deliberation in an affair of such
importance, especially as he did not find himself hurried by the
importunities of want; for, since his arrival in England, he had rather
increased than exhausted his finances, by methods equally certain and
secure. In a word, he, with the assistance of Ratchcali, carried on a
traffic, which yielded great profits, without subjecting the trader to
the least loss or inconvenience. Fathom, for example, wore upon his
finger a large brilliant, which he played to such advantage one night,
at a certain nobleman’s house, where he was prevailed upon to entertain
the company with a solo on the violin, that everybody present took
notice of its uncommon lustre, and it was handed about for the perusal
of every individual. The water and the workmanship were universally
admired; and one among the rest having expressed a desire of knowing
the value of such a jewel, the Count seized that opportunity of
entertaining them with a learned disquisition into the nature of
stones; this introduced the history of the diamond in question, which
he said had been purchased of an Indian trader of Fort St. George, at
an under price; so that the present proprietor could afford to sell it
at a very reasonable rate; and concluded with telling the company,
that, for his own part, he had been importuned to wear it by the
jeweller, who imagined it would have a better chance for attracting a
purchaser on his finger, than while it remained in his own custody.

This declaration was no sooner made, than a certain lady of quality
bespoke the refuse of the jewel, and desired Ferdinand to send the
owner next day to her house, where he accordingly waited upon her
ladyship with the ring, for which he received one hundred and fifty
guineas, two-thirds of the sum being clear gain, and equally divided
betwixt the associates. Nor was this bargain such as reflected
dishonour upon the lady’s taste, or could be productive of ill
consequences to the merchant; for the method of estimating diamonds is
altogether arbitrary; and Ratchcali, who was an exquisite lapidary, had
set it in such a manner as would have imposed upon any ordinary
jeweller. By these means of introduction, the Tyrolese soon monopolised
the custom of a great many noble families, upon which he levied large
contributions, without incurring the least suspicion of deceit. He
every day, out of pure esteem and gratitude for the honour of their
commands, entertained them with the sight of some new trinket, which he
was never permitted to carry home unsold; and from the profits of each
job, a tax was raised for the benefit of our adventurer.

Yet his indultos were not confined to the article of jewels, which
constituted only one part of his revenue. By the industry of his
understrapper, he procured a number of old crazy fiddles, which were
thrown aside as lumber; upon which he counterfeited the Cremona mark,
and otherwise cooked them up with great dexterity; so that, when he had
occasion to regale the lovers of music, he would send for one of these
vamped instruments, and extract from it such tones as quite ravished
the hearers; among whom there was always some conceited pretender, who
spoke in raptures of the violin, and gave our hero an opportunity of
launching out in its praise, and declaring it was the best Cremona he
had ever touched. This encomium never failed to inflame the desires of
the audience, to some one of whom he was generous enough to part with
it at prime cost—that is, for twenty or thirty guineas clear profit;
for he was often able to oblige his friends in this manner, because,
being an eminent connoisseur, his countenance was solicited by all the
musicians, who wanted to dispose of such moveables.

Nor did he neglect the other resources of a skilful virtuoso. Every
auction afforded some picture, in which, though it had been overlooked
by the ignorance of the times, he recognised the style of a great
master, and made a merit of recommending it to some noble friend. This
commerce he likewise extended to medals, bronzes, busts, intaglios, and
old china, and kept divers artificers continually employed in making
antiques for the English nobility. Thus he went on with such rapidity
of success in all his endeavours, that he himself was astonished at the
infatuation he had produced. Nothing was so wretched among the
productions of art, that he could not impose upon the world as a
capital performance; and so fascinated were the eyes of his admirers,
he could easily have persuaded them that a barber’s bason was an
Etrurian patera, and the cover of a copper pot no other than the shield
of Ancus Martius. In short, it was become so fashionable to consult the
Count in everything relating to taste and politeness, that not a plan
was drawn, not even a house furnished, without his advice and
approbation; nay, to such a degree did his reputation in these matters
excel, that a particular pattern of paper-hangings was known by the
name of Fathom; and his hall was every morning crowded with
upholsterers, and other tradesmen, who came, by order of their
employers, to learn his choice, and take his directions.

The character and influence he thus acquired, he took care to maintain
with the utmost assiduity and circumspection. He never failed to appear
the chief personage at all public diversions and private assemblies,
not only in conversation and dress, but also in the article of dancing,
in which he outstripped all his fellows, as far as in every other
genteel accomplishment.




CHAPTER THIRTY-THREE

HE ATTRACTS THE ENVY AND ILL OFFICES OF THE MINOR KNIGHTS OF HIS OWN
ORDER, OVER WHOM HE OBTAINS A COMPLETE VICTORY.


Such a pre-eminence could not be enjoyed without exciting the
malevolence of envy and detraction, in the propagation of which none
were so industrious as the brethren of his own order, who had, like
him, made a descent upon this island, and could not, without repining,
see the whole harvest in the hands of one man, who, with equal art and
discretion, avoided all intercourse with their society. In vain they
strove to discover his pedigree, and detect the particular
circumstances of his life and conversation; all their inquiries were
baffled by the obscurity of his origin, and that solitary scheme which
he had adopted in the beginning of his career. The whole fruit of their
investigation amounted to no more than a certainty that there was no
family of any consideration in Europe known by the denomination of
Fathom; and this discovery they did not fail to divulge for the benefit
of our adventurer, who had by this time taken such firm root in the
favour of the great, as to set all those little arts at defiance; and
when the report reached his ear, actually made his friends merry with
the conjectures which had been circulated at his expense.

His adversaries, finding themselves disappointed in this effort, held a
consultation to devise other measures against him, and came to a
resolution of ending him by the sword, or rather of expelling him from
the kingdom by the fear of death, which they hoped he had not courage
enough to resist, because his deportment had always been remarkably
mild and pacific. It was upon this supposition that they left to the
determination of the dice the choice of the person who should execute
their plan; and the lot falling upon a Swiss, who, from the station of
a foot soldier in the Dutch service, out of which he had been drummed
for theft, had erected himself into the rank of a self-created
chevalier, this hero fortified himself with a double dose of brandy,
and betook himself to a certain noted coffee-house, with an intent to
affront Count Fathom in public.

He was lucky enough to find our adventurer sitting at a table in
conversation with some persons of the first rank; upon which he seated
himself in the next box, and after having intruded himself into their
discourse, which happened to turn upon the politics of some German
courts, “Count,” said he to Ferdinand, in a very abrupt and
disagreeable manner of address, “I was last night in company with some
gentlemen, among whom a dispute happened about the place of your
nativity; pray, what country are you of?” “Sir,” answered the other,
with great politeness, “I at present have the honour to be of England.”
“Oho!” replied the chevalier, “I ask your pardon, that is to say, you
are incog; some people may find it convenient to keep themselves in
that situation.” “True,” said the Count, “but some people are too well
known to enjoy that privilege.” The Swiss being a little disconcerted
at this repartee, which extracted a smile from the audience, after some
pause, observed, that persons of a certain class had good reason to
drop the remembrance of what they have been; but a good citizen will
not forget his country, or former condition. “And a bad citizen,” said
Fathom, “cannot, if he would, provided he has met with his deserts; a
sharper may as well forget the shape of a die, or a discarded soldier
the sound of a drum.”

As the chevalier’s character and story were not unknown, this
application raised an universal laugh at his expense, which provoked
him to such a degree, that, starting up, he swore Fathom could not have
mentioned any object in nature that he himself resembled so much as a
drum, which was exactly typified by his emptiness and sound, with this
difference, however, that a drum was never noisy till beaten, whereas
the Count would never be quiet, until he should have undergone the same
discipline. So saying, he laid his hand upon his sword with a menacing
look, and walked out as if in expectation of being followed by our
adventurer, who suffered himself to be detained by the company, and
very calmly took notice, that his antagonist would not be ill pleased
at their interposition. Perhaps he would not have comported himself
with such ease and deliberation, had not he made such remarks upon the
disposition of the chevalier, as convinced him of his own safety. He
had perceived a perplexity and perturbation in the countenance of the
Swiss, when he first entered the coffee-room; his blunt and precipitate
way of accosting him seemed to denote confusion and compulsion; and, in
the midst of his ferocity, this accurate observer discerned the
trepidation of fear. By the help of these signs, his sagacity soon
comprehended the nature of his schemes, and prepared accordingly for a
formal defiance.

His conjecture was verified next morning by a visit from the chevalier,
who, taking it for granted that Fathom would not face an adversary in
the field, because he had not followed him from the coffee-house, went
to his lodgings with great confidence, and demanded to see the Count
upon an affair that would admit of no delay. Maurice, according to his
instructions, told him that his master was gone out, but desired he
would have the goodness to repose himself in the parlour, till the
Count’s return, which he expected every moment. Ferdinand, who had
taken post in a proper place for observation, seeing his antagonist
fairly admitted, took the same road, and appearing before him, wrapped
up in a long Spanish cloak, desired to know what had procured him the
honour of such an early visit. The Swiss, raising his voice to conceal
his agitation, explained his errand, in demanding reparation for the
injury his honour had sustained the preceding day, in that odious
allusion to a scandalous report which had been raised by the malice of
his enemies; and insisted, in a very imperious style, upon his
attending him forthwith to the nursery in Hyde Park. “Have a little
patience,” said our adventurer with great composure, “and I will do
myself the pleasure to wait upon you in a few moments.”

With these words, he rang the bell, and, calling for a bason of water,
laid aside his cloak, and displayed himself in his shirt, with a sword
in his right hand, which was all over besmeared with recent blood, as
if he had just come from the slaughter of a foe. This phenomenon made
such an impression upon the astonished chevalier, already discomposed
by the resolute behaviour of the Count, that he became jaundiced with
terror and dismay, and, while his teeth chattered in his head, told our
hero he had hoped, from his known politeness, to have found him ready
to acknowledge an injury which might have been the effect of anger or
misapprehension, in which case the affair might have been compromised
to their mutual satisfaction, without proceeding to those extremities
which, among men of honour, are always accounted the last resource. To
this representation Ferdinand answered, that the affair had been of the
chevalier’s own seeking, inasmuch as he had intruded himself into his
company, and treated him with the most insolent and unprovoked abuse,
which plainly flowed from a premeditated design against his honour and
reputation; he, therefore, far from being disposed to own himself in
the wrong, would not even accept of a public acknowledgment from him,
the aggressor, whom he looked upon as an infamous sharper, and was
resolved to chastise accordingly.

Here the conversation was interrupted by the arrival of a person who
was brought to the door in a chair, and conducted into another
apartment, from which a message was brought to the Count, importing,
that the stranger desired to speak with him upon business of the last
importance. Fathom having chid the servant for admitting people without
his order, desired the Swiss to excuse him for a minute longer, and
went in to the next room, from whence the following dialogue was
overheard by this challenger:—“Count,” said the stranger, “you are not
ignorant of my pretensions to the heart of that young lady, at whose
house I met you yesterday; therefore you cannot be surprised when I
declare myself displeased with your visits and behaviour to my
mistress, and demand that you will instantly promise to drop the
correspondence.” “Else what follows?” answered Ferdinand, with a cool
and temperate voice. “My resentment and immediate defiance,” replied
the other; “for the only alternative I propose is, to forego your
design upon that lady, or to decide our pretension by the sword.”

Our hero, having expressed a regard for this visitant as the son of a
gentleman whom he honoured, was at the pains to represent the
unreasonableness of his demand, and the folly of his presumption; and
earnestly exhorted him to put the issue of his cause upon a more safe
and equitable footing. But this admonition, instead of appeasing the
wrath, seemed to inflame the resentment of the opponent, who swore he
would not leave him until he should have accomplished the purport of
his errand. In vain our adventurer requested half an hour for the
despatch of some urgent business, in which he was engaged with a
gentleman in the other parlour. This impetuous rival rejected all the
terms he could propose, and even challenged him to decide the
controversy upon the spot; an expedient to which the other having
assented with reluctance, the door was secured, the swords unsheathed,
and a hot engagement ensued, to the inexpressible pleasure of the
Swiss, who did not doubt that he himself would be screened from all
danger by the event of this rencontre. Nevertheless, his hope was
disappointed in the defeat of the stranger, who was quickly disarmed,
in consequence of a wound through the sword-arm; upon which occasion
Fathom was heard to say, that, in consideration of his youth and
family, he had spared his life; but he would not act with the same
tenderness towards any other antagonist. He then bound up the limb he
had disabled, conducted the vanquished party to his chair, rejoined the
chevalier with a serene countenance, and, asking pardon for having
detained him so long, proposed they should instantly set out in a
hackney-coach for the place of appointment.

The stratagem thus conducted, had all the success the inventor could
desire. The fear of the Swiss had risen almost to an ecstasy before the
Count quitted the room; but after this sham battle, which had been
preconcerted betwixt our adventurer and his friend Ratchcali, the
chevalier’s terrors were unspeakable. He considered Fathom as a devil
incarnate, and went into the coach as a malefactor bound for Tyburn. He
would have gladly compounded for the loss of a leg or arm, and
entertained some transient gleams of hope, that he should escape for
half a dozen flesh-wounds, which he would have willingly received as
the price of his presumption; but these hopes were banished by the
remembrance of that dreadful declaration which he had heard the Count
make, after having overcome his last adversary; and he continued under
the power of the most unsupportable panic, until the carriage halted at
Hyde Park Corner, where he crawled forth in a most piteous and
lamentable condition; so that, when they reached the spot, he was
scarce able to stand.

Here he made an effort to speak, and propose an accommodation upon a
new plan, by which he promised to leave his cause to the arbitrement of
those gentlemen who were present at the rupture, and to ask pardon of
the Count, provided he should be found guilty of a trespass upon good
manners; but this proposal would not satisfy the implacable Ferdinand,
who, perceiving the agony of the Swiss, resolved to make the most of
the adventure, and giving him to understand he was not a man to be
trifled with, desired him to draw without further preamble. Thus
compelled, the unfortunate gamester pulled off his coat, and, putting
himself in a posture, to use the words of Nym, “winked, and held out
his cold iron.”

Our adventurer, far from making a gentle use of the advantages he
possessed, fiercely attacked him, while he was incapable of making
resistance, and, aiming at a fleshy part, ran him through the arm and
outside of the shoulder at the very first pass. The chevalier, already
stupefied with the horror of expectation, no sooner felt his
adversary’s point in his body than he fell to the ground, and,
concluding he was no longer a man for this world, began to cross
himself with great devotion; while Fathom walked home deliberately, and
in his way sent a couple of chairmen to the assistance of the wounded
knight.

This achievement, which could not be concealed from the knowledge of
the public, not only furnished the character of Fathom with fresh
wreaths of admiration and applause, but likewise effectually secured
him from any future attempts of his enemies, to whom the Swiss, for his
own sake, had communicated such terrible ideas of his valour, as
overawed the whole community.




CHAPTER THIRTY-FOUR

HE PERFORMS ANOTHER EXPLOIT, THAT CONVEYS A TRUE IDEA OF HIS GRATITUDE
AND HONOUR.


It was not long after this celebrated victory, that he was invited to
spend part of the summer at the house of a country gentleman, who lived
about one hundred miles from London, possessed of a very opulent
fortune, the greatest part of which was expended in acts of old English
hospitality. He had met with our hero by accident at the table of a
certain great man, and was so struck with his manner and conversation,
as to desire his acquaintance, and cultivate his friendship; and he
thought himself extremely happy in having prevailed upon him to pass a
few weeks in his family.

Fathom, among his other observations, perceived that there was a
domestic uneasiness, occasioned by a very beautiful young creature
about the age of fifteen, who resided in the house under the title of
the gentleman’s niece, though she was in reality his natural daughter,
born before his marriage. This circumstance was not unknown to his
lady, by whose express approbation he had bestowed particular attention
upon the education of the child, whom we shall distinguish by the name
of Celinda. Their liberality in this particular had not been
misapplied; for she not only gave marks of uncommon capacity, but, as
she grew up, became more and more amiable in her person, and was now
returned from the boarding school, possessed of every accomplishment
that could be acquired by one of her age and opportunities. These
qualifications, which endeared her to every other person, excited the
jealousy and displeasure of her supposed aunt, who could not bear to
see her own children eclipsed by this illegitimate daughter, whom she
therefore discountenanced upon all occasions, and exposed to such
mortifications as would in all appearance drive her from her father’s
house. This persecuting spirit was very disagreeable to the husband,
who loved Celinda with a truly paternal affection, and produced
abundance of family disquiet; but being a man of a peaceable and
yielding disposition, he could not long maintain the resolution he had
taken in her favour, and therefore he ceased opposing the malevolence
of his wife.

In this unfortunate predicament stood the fair bastard, at the arrival
of our adventurer, who, being allured by her charms, apprised of her
situation at the same time, took the generous resolution to undermine
her innocence, that he might banquet his vicious appetite with the
spoils of her beauty. Perhaps such a brutal design might not have
entered his imagination, if he had not observed, in the disposition of
this hapless maiden, certain peculiarities from which he derived the
most confident presages of success. Besides a total want of experience,
that left her open and unguarded against the attacks of the other sex,
she discovered a remarkable spirit of credulity and superstitious fear,
which had been cherished by the conversation of her school-fellows. She
was particularly fond of music, in which she had made some progress;
but so delicate was the texture of her nerves, that one day, while
Fathom entertained the company with a favourite air, she actually
swooned with pleasure.

Such sensibility, our projector well knew, must be diffused through all
the passions of her heart; he congratulated himself upon the sure
ascendency he had gained over her in this particular; and forthwith
began to execute the plan he had erected for her destruction. That he
might the more effectually deceive the vigilance of her father’s wife,
he threw such a dash of affectation in his complaisance towards
Celinda, as could not escape the notice of that prying matron, though
it was not palpable enough to disoblige the young lady herself, who
could not so well distinguish between overstrained courtesy and real
good breeding. This behaviour screened him from the suspicion of the
family, who considered it as an effort of politeness, to cover his
indifference and disgust for the daughter of his friend, who had by
this time given some reason to believe she looked upon him with the
eyes of affection; so that the opportunities he enjoyed of conversing
with her in private, were less liable to intrusion or inquiry. Indeed,
from what I have already observed, touching the sentiments of her
stepdame, that lady, far from taking measures for thwarting our hero’s
design, would have rejoiced at the execution of it, and, had she been
informed of his intent, might have fallen upon some method to
facilitate the enterprise; but, as he solely depended upon his own
talents, he never dreamed of soliciting such an auxiliary.

Under cover of instructing and accomplishing her in the exercise of
music, he could not want occasions for promoting his aim; when, after
having soothed her sense of hearing, even to a degree of ravishment, so
as to extort from her an exclamation, importing, that he was surely
something supernatural! he never failed to whisper some insidious
compliment or tale of love, exquisitely suited to the emotions of her
soul. Thus was her heart insensibly subdued; though more than half his
work was still undone; for, at all times, she disclosed such purity of
sentiment, such inviolable attachment to religion and virtue, and
seemed so averse to all sorts of inflammatory discourse, that he durst
not presume upon the footing he had gained in her affection, to explain
the baseness of his desire; he therefore applied to another of her
passions, that proved the bane of her virtue. This was her timidity,
which at first being constitutional, was afterwards increased by the
circumstances of her education, and now aggravated by the artful
conversation of Fathom, which he chequered with dismal stories of
omens, portents, prophecies, and apparitions, delivered upon such
unquestionable testimony, and with such marks of conviction, as
captivated the belief of the devoted Celinda, and filled her
imagination with unceasing terrors.

In vain she strove to dispel those frightful ideas, and avoid such
topics of discourse for the future. The more she endeavoured to banish
them, the more troublesome they became; and such was her infatuation,
that as her terrors increased, her thirst after that sort of knowledge
was augmented. Many sleepless nights did she pass amidst those horrors
of fancy, starting at every noise, and sweating with dreary
apprehension, yet ashamed to own her fears, or solicit the comfort of a
bedfellow, lest she should incur the ridicule and censure of her
father’s wife; and what rendered this disposition the more irksome, was
the solitary situation of her chamber, that stood at the end of a long
gallery scarce within hearing of any other inhabited part of the house.

All these circumstances had been duly weighed by our projector, who,
having prepared Celinda for his purpose, stole at midnight from his
apartment, which was in another storey, and approaching her door, there
uttered a piteous groan; then softly retired to his bed, in full
confidence of seeing next day the effect of this operation. Nor did his
arrow miss the mark. Poor Celinda’s countenance gave such indications
of melancholy and dismay, that he could not omit asking the cause of
her disquiet, and she, at his earnest request, was prevailed upon to
communicate the dreadful salutation of the preceding night, which she
considered as an omen of death to some person of the family, in all
probability to herself, as the groan seemed to issue from one corner of
her own apartment. Our adventurer argued against this supposition, as
contradictory to the common observation of those supernatural warnings
which are not usually imparted to the person who is doomed to die, but
to some faithful friend, or trusty servant, particularly interested in
the event. He therefore supposed, that the groans foreboded the death
of my lady, who seemed to be in a drooping state of health, and were,
by her genius, conveyed to the organs of Celinda, who was the chief
sufferer by her jealous and barbarous disposition; he likewise
expressed an earnest desire to be an ear-witness of such solemn
communication, and, alleging that it was highly improper for a young
lady of her delicate feelings to expose herself alone to such another
dismal visitation, begged he might be allowed to watch all night in her
chamber, in order to defend her from the shocking impressions of fear.

Though no person ever stood more in need of a companion or guard, and
her heart throbbed with transports of dismay at the prospect of night,
she rejected his proposal with due acknowledgment, and resolved to
trust solely to the protection of Heaven. Not that she thought her
innocence or reputation could suffer by her compliance with his
request; for, hitherto, her heart was a stranger to those young desires
which haunt the fancy, and warm the breast of youth; so that, being
ignorant of her danger, she saw not the necessity of avoiding
temptation; but she refused to admit a man into her bedchamber, merely
because it was a step altogether opposite to the forms and decorum of
life. Nevertheless, far from being discouraged by this repulse, he knew
her fears would multiply and reduce that reluctance, which, in order to
weaken, he had recourse to another piece of machinery, that operated
powerfully in behalf of his design.

Some years ago, a twelve-stringed instrument was contrived by a very
ingenious musician, by whom it was aptly entitled the “Harp of Aeolus,”
because, being properly applied to a stream of air, it produces a wild
irregular variety of harmonious sounds, that seem to be the effect of
enchantment, and wonderfully dispose the mind for the most romantic
situations. Fathom, who was really a virtuoso in music, had brought one
of those new-fashioned guitars into the country, and as the effect of
it was still unknown in the family, he that night converted it to the
purposes of his amour, by fixing it in the casement of a window
belonging to the gallery, exposed to the west wind, which then blew in
a gentle breeze. The strings no sooner felt the impression of the balmy
zephyr, than they began to pour forth a stream of melody more
ravishingly delightful than the song of Philomel, the warbling brook,
and all the concert of the wood. The soft and tender notes of peace and
love were swelled up with the most delicate and insensible transition
into a loud hymn of triumph and exultation, joined by the deep-toned
organ, and a full choir of voices, which gradually decayed upon the
ear, until it died away in distant sound, as if a flight of angels had
raised the song in their ascent to heaven. Yet the chords hardly ceased
to vibrate after the expiration of this overture, which ushered in a
composition in the same pathetic style; and this again was succeeded by
a third, almost without pause or intermission, as if the artist’s hand
had been indefatigable, and the theme never to be exhausted.

His heart must be quite callous, and his ear lost to all distinction,
who could hear such harmony without emotion; how deeply, then, must it
have affected the delicate Celinda, whose sensations, naturally acute,
were whetted to a most painful keenness by her apprehension; who could
have no previous idea of such entertainment, and was credulous enough
to believe the most improbable tale of superstition! She was
overwhelmed with awful terror, and, never doubting that the sounds were
more than mortal, recommended herself to the care of Providence in a
succession of pious ejaculations.

Our adventurer, having allowed some time for the effect of this
contrivance, repaired to her chamber door, and, in a whisper, conveyed
through the keyhole, asked if she was awake, begged pardon for such an
unseasonable visit, and desired to know her opinion of the strange
music which he then heard. In spite of her notions of decency, she was
glad of his intrusion, and, being in no condition to observe
punctilios, slipped on a wrapper, opened the door, and, with a
faltering voice, owned herself frightened almost to distraction. He
pretended to console her with reflections, importing, that she was in
the hands of a benevolent Being, who would not impose upon his
creatures any task which they could not bear; he insisted upon her
returning to bed, and assured her he would not stir from her chamber
till day. Thus comforted, she betook herself again to rest, while he
sat down in an elbow-chair at some distance from the bedside, and, in a
soft voice, began the conversation with her on the subject of those
visitations from above, which, though undertaken on pretence of
dissipating her fear and anxiety, was, in reality, calculated for the
purpose of augmenting both.

“That sweet air,” said he, “seems designed for soothing the bodily
anguish of some saint in his last moments. Hark! how it rises into a
more sprightly and elevated strain, as if it were an inspiriting
invitation to the realms of bliss! Sure, he is now absolved from all
the misery of this life! That full and glorious concert of voices and
celestial harps betoken his reception among the heavenly choir, who now
waft his soul to paradisian joys! This is altogether great, solemn, and
amazing! The clock strikes one, the symphony hath ceased!”

This was actually the case; for he had ordered Maurice to remove the
instrument at that hour, lest the sound of it should become too
familiar, and excite the curiosity of some undaunted domestic, who
might frustrate his scheme by discovering the apparatus. As for poor
Celinda, her fancy was, by his music and discourse, worked up to the
highest pitch of enthusiastic terrors; the whole bed shook with her
trepidation, the awful silence that succeeded the supernatural music
threw an additional damp upon her spirits, and the artful Fathom
affecting to snore at the same time, she could no longer contain her
horror, but called upon his name with a fearful accent, and, having
owned her present situation insupportable, entreated him to draw near
her bedside, that he might be within touch on any emergency.

This was a welcome request to our adventurer, who, asking pardon for
his drowsiness, and taking his station on the side of her bed, exhorted
her to compose herself; then locking her hand fast in his own, was
again seized with such an inclination to sleep, that he gradually sunk
down by her side, and seemed to enjoy his repose in that attitude.
Meanwhile, his tender-hearted mistress, that he might not suffer in his
health by his humanity and complaisance, covered him with the
counterpane as he slept, and suffered him to take his rest without
interruption, till he thought proper to start up suddenly with an
exclamation of, “Heaven watch over us!” and then asked, with symptoms
of astonishment, if she had heard nothing. Such an abrupt address upon
such an occasion, did not fail to amaze and affright the gentle
Celinda, who, unable to speak, sprung towards her treacherous
protector; and he, catching her in his arms, bade her fear nothing, for
he would, at the expense of his life, defend her from all danger.

Having thus, by tampering with her weakness, conquered the first and
chief obstacles to his design, he, with great art and perseverance,
improved the intercourse to such a degree of intimacy, as could not but
be productive of all the consequences which he had foreseen. The groans
and music were occasionally repeated, so as to alarm the whole family,
and inspire a thousand various conjectures. He failed not to continue
his nocturnal visits and ghastly discourse, until his attendance became
so necessary to this unhappy maiden, that she durst not stay in her own
chamber without his company, nor even sleep, except in contact with her
betrayer.

Such a commerce between two such persons of a different sex could not
possibly be long carried on, without degenerating from the Platonic
system of sentimental love. In her paroxysms of dismay, he did not
forget to breathe the soft inspirations of his passion, to which she
listened with more pleasure, as they diverted the gloomy ideas of her
fear; and by this time his extraordinary accomplishments had made a
conquest of her heart. What therefore could be a more interesting
transition than that from the most uneasy to the most agreeable
sensation of the human breast?

This being the case, the reader will not wonder that a consummate
traitor, like Fathom, should triumph over the virtue of an artless,
innocent young creature, whose passions he had entirely under his
command. The gradations towards vice are almost imperceptible, and an
experienced seducer can strew them with such enticing and agreeable
flowers, as will lead the young sinner on insensibly, even to the most
profligate stages of guilt. All therefore that can be done by virtue,
unassisted with experience, is to avoid every trial with such a
formidable foe, by declining and discouraging the first advances
towards a particular correspondence with perfidious man, howsoever
agreeable it may seem to be. For here is no security but in conscious
weakness.

Fathom, though possessed of the spoils of poor Celinda’s honour, did
not enjoy his success with tranquillity. Reflection and remorse often
invaded her in the midst of their guilty pleasures, and embittered all
those moments they had dedicated to mutual bliss. For the seeds of
virtue are seldom destroyed at once. Even amidst the rank productions
of vice, they regerminate to a sort of imperfect vegetation, like some
scattered hyacinths shooting up among the weeds of a ruined garden,
that testify the former culture and amenity of the soil. She sighed at
the sad remembrance of that virgin dignity which she had lost; she wept
at the prospect of that disgrace, mortification, and misery she should
undergo, when abandoned by this transient lover, and severely
reproached him for the arts he had used to shipwreck her innocence and
peace.

Such expostulations are extremely unseasonable, when addressed to a man
well-nigh sated with the effects of his conquest. They act like strong
blasts of wind applied to embers almost extinguished, which, instead of
reviving the flame, scatter and destroy every remaining particle of
fire. Our adventurer, in the midst of his peculiarities, had
inconstancy in common with the rest of his sex. More than half cloyed
with the possession of Celinda, he could not fail to be disgusted with
her upbraidings; and had she not been the daughter of a gentleman whose
friendship he did not think it his interest to forfeit, he would have
dropped this correspondence, without reluctance or hesitation. But, as
he had measures to keep with a family of such consequence, he
constrained his inclinations, so far as to counterfeit those raptures
he no longer felt, and found means to appease those intervening tumults
of her grief.

Foreseeing, however, that it would not be always in his power to
console her on these terms, he resolved, if possible, to divide her
affection, which now glowed upon him too intensely; and, with that
view, whenever she complained of the vapours or dejection, he
prescribed, and even insisted upon her swallowing certain cordials of
the most palatable composition, without which he never travelled; and
these produced such agreeable reveries and flow of spirits, that she
gradually became enamoured of intoxication; while he encouraged the
pernicious passion, by expressing the most extravagant applause and
admiration at the wild irregular sallies it produced. Without having
first made this diversion, he would have found it impracticable to
leave the house with tranquillity; but, when this bewitching philtre
grew into an habit, her attachment to Ferdinand was insensibly
dissolved; she began to bear his neglect with indifference, and,
sequestering herself from the rest of the family, used to solicit this
new ally for consolation.

Having thus put the finishing stroke to the daughter’s ruin, he took
leave of the father, with many acknowledgments and expressions of
gratitude for his hospitality and friendship, and, riding across the
country to Bristol, took up his habitation near the hot well, where he
stayed during the remaining part of the season. As for the miserable
Celinda, she became more and more addicted to the vices in which she
had been initiated by his superlative perfidy and craft, until she was
quite abandoned by decency and caution. Her father’s heart was torn
with anguish, while his wife rejoiced in her fall; at length her ideas
were quite debased by her infirmity; she grew every day more and more
sensual and degenerate, and contracted an intimacy with one of the
footmen, who was kind enough to take her to wife, in hope of obtaining
a good settlement from his master; but, being disappointed in his aim,
he conducted her to London, where he made shift to insinuate himself
into another service, leaving her to the use, and partly the advantage,
of her own person, which was still uncommonly attractive.




CHAPTER THIRTY-FIVE

HE REPAIRS TO BRISTOL SPRING, WHERE HE REIGNS PARAMOUNT DURING THE
WHOLE SEASON.


We shall therefore leave her in this comfortable situation, and return
to our adventurer, whose appearance at Bristol was considered as a
happy omen by the proprietor of the hot well, and all the people who
live by the resort of company to that celebrated spring. Nor were they
deceived in their prognostic. Fathom, as usual, formed the nucleus or
kernel of the beau monde; and the season soon became so crowded, that
many people of fashion were obliged to quit the place for want of
lodging. Ferdinand was the soul that animated the whole society. He not
only invented parties of pleasure, but also, by his personal talents,
rendered them more agreeable. In a word, he regulated their diversions,
and the master of the ceremonies never would allow the ball to be begun
till the Count was seated.

Having thus made himself the object of admiration and esteem, his
advice was an oracle, to which they had recourse in all doubtful cases
of punctilio or dispute, or even of medicine; for among his other
accomplishments, his discourse on that subject was so plausible, and
well adapted to the understanding of his hearers, that any person who
had not actually studied the medical art would have believed he was
inspired by the spirit of Aesculapius. What contributed to the
aggrandisement of his character in this branch of knowledge, was a
victory he obtained over an old physician, who plied at the well, and
had one day unfortunately begun to harangue in the pump-room upon the
nature of the Bristol water. In the course of this lecture he undertook
to account for the warmth of the fluid; and his ideas being perplexed
with a great deal of reading, which he had not been able to digest, his
disquisition was so indistinct, and his expression so obscure and
unentertaining, that our hero seized the opportunity of displaying his
own erudition, by venturing to contradict some circumstances of the
doctor’s hypothesis, and substituting a theory of his own, which, as he
had invented it for the purpose, was equally amusing and chimerical.

He alleged, that fire was the sole vivifying principle that pervaded
all nature; that, as the heat of the sun concocted the juice of
vegetables, and ripened those fruits that grow upon the surface of this
globe, there was likewise an immense store of central fire reserved
within the bowels of the earth, not only for the generation of gems,
fossils, and all the purposes of the mineral world, but likewise for
cherishing and keeping alive those plants which would otherwise perish
by the winter’s cold. The existence of such a fire he proved from the
nature of all those volcanoes, which in almost every corner of the
earth are continually vomiting up either flames or smoke. “These,” said
he, “are the great vents appointed by nature for the discharge of that
rarefied air and combustible matter, which, if confined, would burst
the globe asunder; but, besides the larger outlets, there are some
small chimneys through which part of the heat transpires; a vapour of
that sort, I conceive, must pass through the bed or channel of this
spring, the waters of which, accordingly retain a moderate warmth.”

This account, which totally overthrew the other’s doctrine, was so
extremely agreeable to the audience, that the testy doctor lost his
temper, and gave them to understand, without preamble, that he must be
a person wholly ignorant of natural philosophy, who could invent such a
ridiculous system, and they involved in worse than an Egyptian fog,
that could not at once discern its weakness and absurdity. This
declaration introduced a dispute, which was unanimously determined in
favour of our adventurer. On all such occasions the stream of prejudice
runs against the physician, even though his antagonist has nothing to
recommend himself to the favour of the spectators; and this decision
depends upon divers considerations. In the first place, there is a
continual war carried on against the learned professions, by all those
who, conscious of their own ignorance, seek to level the reputation of
their superiors with their own. Secondly, in all disputes upon physic
that happen betwixt a person who really understands the art, and an
illiterate pretender, the arguments of the first will seem obscure and
unintelligible to those who are unacquainted with the previous systems
on which they are built; while the other’s theory, derived from common
notions, and superficial observation, will be more agreeable, because
better adapted to the comprehension of the hearers. Thirdly, the
judgment of the multitude is apt to be biassed by that surprise which
is the effect of seeing an artist foiled at his own weapons, by one who
engages him only for amusement.

Fathom, besides these advantages, was blessed with a flow of language,
an elegant address, a polite and self-denying style of argumentation,
together with a temper not to be ruffled; so that the victory could not
long waver between him and the physician, to whom he was infinitely
superior in every acquisition but that of solid learning, of which the
judges had no idea. This contest was not only glorious but profitable
to our adventurer, who grew into such request in his medical capacity,
that the poor doctor was utterly deserted by his patients, and Fathom’s
advice solicited by every valetudinarian in the place; nor did he
forfeit the character he thus acquired by any miscarriages in his
practice. Being but little conversant with the materia medica, the
circle of his prescriptions was very small; his chief study was to
avoid all drugs of rough operation and uncertain effect, and to
administer such only as should be agreeable to the palate, without
doing violence to the constitution. Such a physician could not but be
agreeable to people of all dispositions; and, as most of the patients
were in some shape hypochondriac, the power of imagination,
co-operating with his remedies, often effected a cure.

On the whole, it became the fashion to consult the Count in all
distempers, and his reputation would have had its run, though the death
of every patient had given the lie to his pretensions. But empty fame
was not the sole fruit of his success. Though no person would presume
to affront this noble graduate with a fee, they did not fail to
manifest their gratitude by some more valuable present. Every day some
superb piece of china, curious snuffbox, or jewel, was pressed upon
him; so that, at the end of the season, he could almost have furnished
a toyshop with the acknowledgments he had received. Not only his
avarice, but his pleasure, was gratified in the course of his medical
administration. He enjoyed free access, egress, and regress with all
the females at the well, and no matron scrupled to put her daughter
under his care and direction. These opportunities could not be lost
upon a man of his intriguing genius; though he conducted his amours
with such discretion, that, during the whole season, no lady’s
character suffered on his account, yet he was highly fortunate in his
addresses, and we may venture to affirm, that the reproach of
barrenness was more than once removed by the vigour of his endeavours.




CHAPTER THIRTY-SIX

HE IS SMITTEN WITH THE CHARMS OF A FEMALE ADVENTURER, WHOSE ALLUREMENTS
SUBJECT HIM TO A NEW VICISSITUDE OF FORTUNE.


Among those who were distinguished by his gallantry was the young wife
of an old citizen of London, who had granted her permission to reside
at the hot well for the benefit of her health, under the eye and
inspection of his own sister, who was a maiden of fifty years. The
pupil, whose name was Mrs. Trapwell, though low in stature, was finely
shaped, her countenance engaging, though her complexion was brown, her
hair in colour rivalled the raven’s back, and her eyes emulated the
lustre of the diamond. Fathom had been struck with her first
appearance; but found it impracticable to elude the vigilance of her
duenna, so as to make a declaration of his flame; until she herself,
guessing the situation of his thoughts, and not displeased with the
discovery, thought proper to furnish him with the opportunity he
wanted, by counterfeiting an indisposition, for the cure of which she
knew his advice would be implored. This was the beginning of an
acquaintance, which was soon improved to his wish; and so well did she
manage her attractions, as in some measure to fix the inconstancy of
his disposition; for, at the end of the season, his passion was not
sated; and they concerted the means of continuing their commerce, even
after their return to London.

This intercourse effectually answered the purpose of the husband, who
had been decoyed into matrimony by the cunning of his spouse, whom he
had privately kept as a concubine before marriage. Conscious of her own
precarious situation, she had resolved to impose upon the infirmities
of Trapwell, and, feigning herself pregnant, gave him to understand she
could no longer conceal her condition from the knowledge of her
brother, who was an officer in the army, and of such violent passions,
that, should he once discover her backsliding, he would undoubtedly
wipe away the stains of his family dishonour with her own blood, as
well as that of her keeper. The citizen, to prevent such a catastrophe,
took her to wife; but soon after perceiving the trick which had been
played upon him, set his invention at work, and at length contrived a
scheme which he thought would enable him, not only to retrieve his
liberty, but also indemnify himself for the mortification he had
undergone.

Far from creating any domestic disturbance, by upbraiding her with her
finesse, he seemed perfectly well pleased with his acquisition; and, as
he knew her void of any principle, and extremely addicted to pleasure,
he chose proper occasions to insinuate, that she might gratify her own
inclination, and at the same time turn her beauty to good account. She
joyfully listened to these remonstrances, and, in consequence of their
mutual agreement, she repaired to Bristol Spring, on pretence of an ill
state of health, accompanied by her sister-in-law, whom they did not
think proper to intrust with the real motive of her journey. Fathom’s
person was agreeable, and his finances supposed to be in flourishing
order; therefore, she selected him from the herd of gallants, as a
proper sacrifice to the powers which she adored; and, on her arrival in
London, made her husband acquainted with the importance of her
conquest.

Trapwell overwhelmed her with caresses and praise for her discreet and
dutiful conduct, and faithfully promised that she should pocket in her
own privy purse one-half of the spoils that should be gathered from her
gallant, whom she therefore undertook to betray, after he had swore, in
the most solemn manner, that his intention was not to bring the affair
to a public trial, which would redound to his own disgrace, but to
extort a round sum of money from the Count, by way of composition.
Confiding in this protestation, she in a few days gave him intelligence
of an assignation she had made with our adventurer, at a certain bagnio
near Covent Garden; upon which he secured the assistance of a
particular friend and his own journeyman, with whom, and a constable,
he repaired to the place of rendezvous, where he waited in an adjoining
room, according to the directions of his virtuous spouse, until she
made the preconcerted signal of hemming three times aloud, when he and
his associates rushed into the chamber and surprised our hero in bed
with his inamorata.

The lady on this occasion acted her part to a miracle; she screamed at
their approach; and, after an exclamation of “Ruined and undone!”
fainted away in the arms of her spouse, who had by this time seized her
by the shoulders, and begun to upbraid her with her infidelity and
guilt. As for Fathom, his affliction was unutterable, when he found
himself discovered in that situation, and made prisoner by the two
assistants, who had pinioned him in such a manner, that he could not
stir, much less accomplish an escape. All his ingenuity and presence of
mind seemed to forsake him in this emergency. The horrors of an English
jury overspread his imagination; for he at once perceived that the toil
into which he had fallen was laid for the purpose; consequently he took
it for granted that there would be no deficiency in point of evidence.
Soon as he recollected himself, he begged that no violence might be
offered to his person, and entreated the husband to favour him with a
conference, in which the affair might be compromised, without prejudice
to the reputation of either.

At first Trapwell breathed nothing but implacable revenge, but, by the
persuasion of his friends, after he had sent home his wife in a chair,
he was prevailed upon to hear the proposals of the delinquent, who
having assured him, by way of apology, that he had always believed the
lady was a widow, made him an offer of five hundred pounds, as an
atonement for the injury he had sustained. This being a sum no ways
adequate to the expectation of the citizen, who looked upon the Count
as possessor of an immense estate, he rejected the terms with disdain,
and made instant application to a judge, from whom he obtained a
warrant for securing his person till the day of trial. Indeed, in this
case, money was but a secondary consideration with Trapwell, whose
chief aim was to be legally divorced from a woman he detested.
Therefore there was no remedy for the unhappy Count, who in vain
offered to double the sum. He found himself reduced to the bitter
alternative of procuring immediate bail, or going directly to Newgate.

In this dilemma he sent a messenger to his friend Ratchcali, whose
countenance fell when he understood the Count’s condition; nor would he
open his mouth in the style of consolation, until he had consulted a
certain solicitor of his acquaintance, who assured him the law abounded
with such resources as would infallibly screen the defendant, had the
fact been still more palpable than it was. He said there was great
presumption to believe the Count had fallen a sacrifice to a
conspiracy, which by some means or other would be detected; and, in
that case, the plaintiff might obtain one shilling in lieu of damages.
If that dependence should fail, he hinted that, in all probability, the
witnesses were not incorruptible; or, should they prove to be so, one
man’s oath was as good as another’s; and, thank Heaven, there was no
dearth of evidence, provided money could be found to answer the
necessary occasions.

Ratchcali, comforted by these insinuations, and dreading the resentment
of our adventurer, who, in his despair, might punish him severely for
his want of friendship, by some precipitate explanation of the commerce
they had carried on; moved, I say, by these considerations, and
moreover tempted with the prospect of continuing to reap the advantages
resulting from their conjunction, he and another person of credit with
whom he largely dealt in jewels, condescended to become sureties for
the appearance of Fathom, who was accordingly admitted to bail. Not but
that the Tyrolese knew Ferdinand too well to confide in his parole. He
depended chiefly upon his ideas of self-interest, which, he thought,
would persuade him to risk the uncertain issue of a trial, rather than
quit the field before the harvest was half over; and he was resolved to
make his own retreat without ceremony, should our hero be unwise enough
to abandon his bail.

Such an adventure could not long lie concealed from the notice of the
public, even if both parties had been at pains to suppress the
circumstances. But the plaintiff, far from seeking to cover, affected
to complain loudly of his misfortune, that he might interest his
neighbours in his behalf, and raise a spirit of rancour and animosity,
to influence the jury against this insolent foreigner, who had come
over into England to debauch our wives and deflower our daughters;
while he employed a formidable band of lawyers to support the
indictment, which he laid at ten thousand pounds damages.

Meanwhile, Fathom and his associate did not fail to take all proper
measures for his defence; they retained a powerful bar of counsel, and
the solicitor was supplied with one hundred pounds after another, to
answer the expense of secret service; still assuring his clients that
everything was in an excellent train, and that his adversary would gain
nothing but shame and confusion of face. Nevertheless, there was a
necessity for postponing the trial, on account of a material evidence,
who, though he wavered, was not yet quite brought over; and the
attorney found means to put off the decision from term to term, until
there was no quibble left for further delay. While this suit was
depending, our hero continued to move in his usual sphere; nor did the
report of his situation at all operate to his disadvantage in the
polite world; on the contrary, it added a fresh plume to his character,
in the eyes of all those who were not before acquainted with the
triumphs of his gallantry. Notwithstanding this countenance of his
friends, he himself considered the affair in a very serious light; and
perceiving that, at any rate, he must be a considerable loser, he
resolved to double his assiduity in trade, that he might be the more
able to afford the extraordinary expense to which he was subjected.




CHAPTER THIRTY-SEVEN

FRESH CAUSE FOR EXERTING HIS EQUANIMITY AND FORTITUDE.


The reader may have observed, that Fathom, with all his circumspection,
had a weak side, which exposed him to sundry mischances; this was his
covetousness, which on some occasions became too hard for his
discretion. At this period of time it was, by the circumstances of his
situation, inflamed to a degree of rapacity. He was now prevailed upon
to take a hand at whist or piquet, and even to wield the hazard-box;
though he had hitherto declared himself an irreconcilable enemy to all
sorts of play; and so uncommon was his success and dexterity at these
exercises, as to surprise his acquaintance, and arouse the suspicion of
some people, who repined at his prosperity.

But in nothing was his conduct more inexcusable than in giving way to
the dangerous temerity of Ratchcali, which he had been always at pains
to restrain, and permitting him to practise the same fraud upon an
English nobleman, which had been executed upon himself at Frankfort. In
other words, the Tyrolese, by the canal of Ferdinand’s finger and
recommendation, sold a pebble for a real brilliant, and in a few days
the cheat was discovered, to the infinite confusion of our adventurer,
who nevertheless assumed the guise of innocence with so much art, and
expressed such indignation against the villain who had imposed upon his
judgment and unsuspecting generosity, that his lordship acquitted him
of any share in the deceit, and contented himself with the restitution,
which he insisted upon making out of his own pocket, until he should be
able to apprehend the rogue, who had thought proper to abscond for his
own safety. In spite of all this exculpation, his character did not
fail to retain a sort of stigma, which indeed the plainest proofs of
innocence are hardly able to efface; and his connexion with such a
palpable knave as the Tyrolese appeared to be, had an effect to his
prejudice in the minds of all those who were privy to the occurrence.

When a man’s reputation is once brought in question, every trifle is,
by the malevolence of mankind, magnified into a strong presumption
against the culprit. A few whispers communicated by the envious mouth
of slander, which he can have no opportunity to answer and refute,
shall, in the opinion of the world, convict him of the most horrid
crimes; and for one hypocrite who is decked with the honours of virtue,
there are twenty good men who suffer the ignominy of vice; so well
disposed are individuals to trample upon the fame of their
fellow-creatures. If the most unblemished merit is not protected from
this injustice, it will not be wondered at that no quarter was given to
the character of an adventurer like Fathom, who, among other unlucky
occurrences, had the misfortune to be recognised about this time by his
two Parisian friends, Sir Stentor Stile and Sir Giles Squirrel.

These worthy knights-errant had returned to their own country, after
having made a very prosperous campaign in France, at the end of which,
however, they very narrowly escaped the galleys; and seeing the Polish
Count seated at the head of taste and politeness, they immediately
circulated the story of his defeat at Paris, with many ludicrous
circumstances of their own invention, and did not scruple to affirm
that he was a rank impostor. When the laugh is raised upon a great man,
he never fails to dwindle into contempt. Ferdinand began to perceive a
change in the countenance of his friends. His company was no longer
solicited with that eagerness which they had formerly expressed in his
behalf. Even his entertainments were neglected; when he appeared at any
private or public assembly, the ladies, instead of glowing with
pleasure, as formerly, now tittered or regarded him with looks of
disdain; and a certain pert, little, forward coquette, with a view to
put him out of countenance, by raising the laugh at his expense, asked
him one night, at a drum, when he had heard from his relations in
Poland? She succeeded in her design upon the mirth of the audience, but
was disappointed in the other part of her aim; for our hero replied,
without the least mark of discomposure, “They are all in good health at
your service, madam; I wish I knew in what part of the world your
relations reside, that I might return the compliment.” By this answer,
which was the more severe, as the young lady was of very doubtful
extraction, he retorted the laugh upon the aggressor, though he
likewise failed in his attempt upon her temper; for she was perhaps the
only person present who equalled himself in stability of countenance.

Notwithstanding this appearance of unconcern, he was deeply touched
with these marks of alienation in the behaviour of his friends, and,
foreseeing in his own disgrace the total shipwreck of his fortune, he
entered into a melancholy deliberation with himself about the means of
retrieving his importance in the beau monde, or of turning his address
into some other channel, where he could stand upon a less slippery
foundation. In this exercise of his thoughts, no scheme occurred more
feasible than that of securing the booty he had made, and retiring with
his associate, who was also blown, into some other country, where their
names and characters being unknown, they might pursue their old plan of
commerce without molestation. He imparted this suggestion to the
Tyrolese, who approved the proposal of decamping, though he combated
with all his might our hero’s inclination to withdraw himself before
the trial, by repeating the assurances of the solicitor, who told him
he might depend upon being reimbursed by the sentence of the court for
great part of the sums he had expended in the course of the
prosecution.

Fathom suffered himself to be persuaded by these arguments, supported
with the desire of making an honourable retreat, and, waiting patiently
for the day of trouble, discharged his sureties, by a personal
appearance in court. Yet this was not the only score he discharged that
morning; the solicitor presented his own bill before they set out for
Westminster Hall, and gave the Count to understand that it was the
custom, from time immemorial, for the client to clear with his attorney
before trial. Ferdinand had nothing to object against this established
rule, though he looked upon it as a bad omen, in spite of all the
solicitor’s confidence and protestations; and he was not a little
confounded, when, looking into the contents, he found himself charged
with 350 attendances. He knew it was not his interest to disoblige his
lawyer at such a juncture; nevertheless, he could not help
expostulating with him on this article, which seemed to be so falsely
stated with regard to the number; when his questions drew on an
explanation, by which he found he had incurred the penalty of three
shillings and fourpence for every time he chanced to meet the
conscientious attorney, either in the park, the coffee-house, or the
street, provided they had exchanged the common salutation; and he had
good reason to believe the solicitor had often thrown himself in his
way, with a view to swell this item of his account.

With this extortion our adventurer was fain to comply, because he lay
at the mercy of the caitiff; accordingly, he with a good grace paid the
demand, which, including his former disbursements, amounted to three
hundred and sixty-five pounds eleven shillings and threepence three
farthings, and then presenting himself before the judge, quietly
submitted to the laws of the realm. His counsel behaved like men of
consummate abilities in their profession; they exerted themselves with
equal industry, eloquence, and erudition, in their endeavours to
perplex the truth, browbeat the evidence, puzzle the judge, and mislead
the jury; but the defendant found himself wofully disappointed in the
deposition of Trapwell’s journeyman, whom the solicitor pretended to
have converted to his interest. This witness, as the attorney
afterwards declared, played booty, and the facts came out so clear,
that Ferdinand Count Fathom was convicted of criminal conversation with
the plaintiff’s wife, and cast in fifteen hundred pounds, under the
denomination of damages.

He was not so much surprised as afflicted at this decision, because he
saw it gradually approaching from the examination of the first
evidence. His thoughts were now employed in casting about for some
method of deliverance from the snare in which he found himself
entangled. To escape, he foresaw it would be impracticable, as Trapwell
would undoubtedly be prepared for arresting him before he could quit
Westminster Hall; he was too well acquainted with Ratchcali’s
principles, to expect any assistance from that quarter in money
matters; and he was utterly averse to the payment of the sum awarded
against him, which would have exhausted his whole fortune. He therefore
resolved to try the friendship of some persons of fashion, with whom he
had maintained an intimacy of correspondence. Should they fail him in
the day of his necessity, he proposed to have recourse to his former
sureties, one of whom he meant to bilk, while the other might accompany
him in his retreat; or, should both these expedients miscarry, he
determined, rather than part with his effects, to undergo the most
disagreeable confinement, in hope of obtaining the jailor’s connivance
at his escape.

These resolutions being taken, he met his fate with great fortitude and
equanimity, and calmly suffered himself to be conveyed to the house of
a sheriff’s officer, who, as he made his exit from the hall, according
to his own expectation, executed a writ against him, at the suit of
Trapwell, for a debt of two thousand pounds. To this place he was
followed by his solicitor, who was allured by the prospect of another
job, and who, with great demonstrations of satisfaction, congratulated
him upon the happy issue of the trial; arrogating to himself the merit
of having saved him eight thousand pounds in the article of damages, by
the previous steps he had taken, and the noble defence that he and his
friends the counsel had made for their client; he even hinted an
expectation of receiving a gratuity for his extraordinary care and
discretion.

Fathom, galled as he was with his misfortune, and enraged at the
effrontery of this pettifogger, maintained a serenity of countenance,
and sent the attorney with a message to the plaintiff, importing, that,
as he was a foreigner, and could not be supposed to have so much cash
about him, as to spare fifteen hundred pounds from the funds of his
ordinary expense, he would grant him a bond payable in two months,
during which period he should be able to procure a proper remittance
from his own estate. While the solicitor was employed in this
negotiation, he despatched his valet-de-chambre to one nobleman, and
Maurice to another, with billets, signifying the nature of the verdict
which his adversary had obtained, and desiring that each would lend him
a thousand pounds upon his parole, until he could negotiate bills upon
the Continent.

His three messengers returned almost at the same instant of time, and
these were the answers they brought back.

Trapwell absolutely rejected his personal security; and threatened him
with all the horrors of a jail, unless he would immediately discharge
the debt, or procure sufficient bondsmen; and one of his quality
friends favoured him with this reply to his request:—

“MY DEAR COUNT!
I am mortally chagrined at the triumph you have furnished to that
rascally citizen. By the lard! the judge must have been in the terrors
of cuckoldom, to influence the decision; and the jury a mere herd of
horned beasts, to bring in such a barbarous verdict. Egad! at this
rate, no gentleman will be able to lie with another man’s wife, but at
the risk of a cursed prosecution. But to waive this disagreeable
circumstance, which you must strive to forget; I declare my
mortification is still the greater, because I cannot at present supply
you with the trifle your present exigency requires; for, to tell you a
secret, my own finances are in damnable confusion. But a man of Count
Fathom’s figure and address can never be puzzled for the want of such a
paltry sum. Adieu, my dear Count! we shall, I suppose, have the
pleasure of seeing you to-morrow at White’s: meanwhile, I have the
honour to be, with the most perfect attachment,


yours, GRIZZLEGRIN.”


The other noble peer, to whom he addressed himself on this occasion,
cherished the same sentiments of virtue, friendship, and generosity;
but his expression was so different, that we shall, for the edification
of the reader, transcribe his letter in his own words:—

“SIR,
I was never more astonished than at the receipt of your very
extraordinary billet, wherein you solicit the loan of a thousand
pounds, which you desire may be sent with the bearer on the faith of
your parole. Sir, I have no money to send you or lend you; and cannot
help repeating my expressions of surprise at your confidence in making
such a strange and unwarranted demand. ’Tis true, I may have made
professions of friendship, while I looked upon you as a person of
honour and good morals; but now that you are convicted of such a
flagrant violation of the laws of that kingdom where you have been
treated with such hospitality and respect, I think myself fully
absolved from any such conditional promise, which indeed is never
interpreted into any other than a bare compliment. I am sorry you have
involved your character and fortune in such a disagreeable affair, and
am,


Sir, yours, etc.
TROMPINGTON.”


Ferdinand was not such a novice in the world as to be disappointed at
these repulses; especially as he had laid very little stress upon the
application, which was made by way of an experiment upon the gratitude
or caprice of those two noblemen, whom he had actually more than once
obliged with the same sort of assistance which he now solicited, though
not to such a considerable amount.

Having nothing further to expect from the fashionable world, he sent
the Tyrolese to the person who had been bail for his appearance, with
full instructions to explain his present occasion in the most
favourable light, and desire he would reinforce the credit of the Count
with his security; but that gentleman, though he placed the most
perfect confidence on the honour of our hero, and would have willingly
entered into bonds again for his personal appearance, was not quite so
well satisfied of his circumstances, as to become liable for the
payment of two thousand pounds, an expense which, in his opinion, the
finances of no foreign Count were able to defray. He therefore lent a
deaf ear to the most pressing remonstrances of the ambassador, who had
recourse to several other merchants, with the same bad success; so that
the prisoner, despairing of bail, endeavoured to persuade Ratchcali,
that it would be his interest to contribute a thousand pounds towards
his discharge, that he might be enabled to quit England with a good
grace, and execute his part of the plan they had projected.

So powerful was his eloquence on the occasion, and such strength of
argument did he use, that even the Tyrolese seemed convinced, though
reluctantly, and agreed to advance the necessary sum upon the bond and
judgment of our adventurer, who, being disabled from transacting his
own affairs in person, was obliged to intrust Ratchcali with his keys,
papers, and power of attorney, under the check and inspection of his
faithful Maurice and the solicitor, whose fidelity he bespoke with the
promise of an ample recompense.




CHAPTER THIRTY-EIGHT

THE BITER IS BIT.


Yet, he had no sooner committed his effects to the care of this
triumvirate, than his fancy was visited with direful warnings, which
produced cold sweats and palpitations, and threw him into such agonies
of apprehension as he had never known before. He remembered the former
desertion of the Tyrolese, the recent villany of the solicitor, and
recollected the remarks he had made upon the disposition and character
of his valet, which evinced him a fit companion for the other two.

Alarmed at these reflections, he entreated the bailiff to indulge him
with a visit to his own lodgings, and even offered one hundred guineas
as a gratification for his compliance. But the officer, who had
formerly lost a considerable sum by the escape of a prisoner, would not
run any risk in an affair of such consequence, and our hero was obliged
to submit to the tortures of his own presaging fears. After he had
waited five hours in the most racking impatience, he saw the attorney
enter with all the marks of hurry, fatigue, and consternation, and
heard him exclaim, “Good God, have you seen the gentleman?”

Fathom found his fears realised in this interrogation, to which he
answered in a tone of horror and dismay, “What gentleman? I suppose I
am robbed. Speak, and keep me no longer in suspense.” “Robbed!” cried
the attorney, “the Lord forbid! I hope you can depend upon the person
you empowered to receive your jewels and cash? I must own his
proceedings are a little extraordinary; for after he had rummaged your
scrutoire, from which, in presence of me and your servant, he took one
hundred and fifty guineas, a parcel of diamond rings and buckles,
according to this here inventory, which I wrote with my own hand, and
East India bonds to the tune of five hundred more, we adjourned to
Garraway’s, where he left me alone, under pretence of going to a broker
of his acquaintance who lived in the neighbourhood, while the valet, as
I imagined, waited for us in the alley. Well, sir, he stayed so long,
that I began to be uneasy, and at length resolved to send the servant
in quest of him, but when I went out for that purpose, deuce a servant
was to be found; though I in person inquired for him at every alehouse
within half a mile of the place. I then despatched no less than five
ticket porters upon the scent after them, and I myself, by a direction
from the bar-keeper, went to Signior Ratchcali’s lodgings, where, as
they told me, he had not been seen since nine o’clock in the morning.
Upon this intimation, I came directly hither, to give you timely
notice, that you may without delay take measures for your own security.
The best thing you can do, is to take out writs for apprehending him,
in the counties of Middlesex, Surrey, Kent, and Essex, and I shall put
them in the hands of trusty and diligent officers, who will soon ferret
him out of his lurking-place, provided he skulks within ten miles of
the bills of mortality. To be sure, the job will be expensive; and all
these runners must be paid beforehand. But what then? the defendant is
worth powder, and if we can once secure him, I’ll warrant the
prosecution will quit cost.”

Fathom was almost choked with concern and resentment at the news of
this mischance, so that he could not utter one word until this
narrative was finished. Nor was his suspicion confined to the Tyrolese
and his own lacquey; he considered the solicitor as their accomplice
and director, and was so much provoked at the latter part of his
harangue, that his discretion seemed to vanish, and, collaring the
attorney, “Villain!” said he, “you yourself have been a principal actor
in this robbery.” Then turning to the bystanders, “and I desire in the
King’s name that he may be secured, until I can make oath before a
magistrate in support of the charge. If you refuse your assistance in
detaining him, I will make immediate application to one of the
secretaries of state, who is my particular friend, and he will see
justice done to all parties.”

At mention of this formidable name, the bailiff and his whole family
were in commotion, to obstruct the retreat of the lawyer, who stood
aghast and trembled under the grasp of our adventurer. But, soon as he
found himself delivered from this embrace, by the interposition of the
spectators, and collected his spirits, which had been suddenly
dissipated by Fathom’s unexpected assault, he began to display one art
of his occupation, which he always reserved for extraordinary
occasions. This was the talent of abuse, which he poured forth with
such fluency of opprobrious language, that our hero, smarting as he
was, and almost desperate with his loss, deviated from that temperance
of behaviour which he had hitherto preserved, and snatching up the
poker, with one stroke opened a deep trench upon the attorney’s skull,
that extended from the hind head almost to the upper part of the nose,
upon each side of which it discharged a sanguine stream.
Notwithstanding the pain of this application, the solicitor was
transported with joy at the sense of the smart, and inwardly
congratulated himself upon the appearance of his own blood, which he no
sooner perceived, than he exclaimed, “I’m a dead man,” and fell upon
the floor at full length.

Immediate recourse was had to a surgeon in the neighbourhood, who,
having examined the wound, declared there was a dangerous depression of
the first table of the skull, and that, if he could save the patient’s
life without the application of the trepan, it would be one of the
greatest cures that ever were performed. By this time, Fathom’s first
transport being overblown, he summoned up his whole resolution, and
reflected upon his own ruin with that fortitude which had never failed
him in the emergencies of his fate. Little disturbed at the prognostic
of the surgeon, which he considered in the right point of view; “Sir,”
said he, “I am not so unacquainted with the resistance of an attorney’s
skull, as to believe the chastisement I have bestowed on him will at
all endanger his life, which is in much greater jeopardy from the hands
of the common executioner. For, notwithstanding this accident, I am
determined to prosecute the rascal for robbery with the utmost severity
of the law; and, that I may have a sufficient fund left for that
prosecution, I shall not at present throw away one farthing in
unnecessary expense, but insist upon being conveyed to prison without
farther delay.”

This declaration was equally unwelcome to the bailiff, surgeon, and
solicitor, who, upon the supposition that the Count was a person of
fortune, and would rather part with an immense sum than incur the
ignominy of a jail, or involve himself in another disgraceful lawsuit,
had resolved to fleece him to the utmost of their power. But, now the
attorney finding him determined to set his fate at defiance, and to
retort upon him a prosecution, which he had no design to undergo, began
to repent heartily of the provocation he had given, and to think
seriously on some method to overcome the obstinacy of the incensed
foreigner. With this view, while the bailiff conducted him to bed in
another apartment, he desired the catchpole to act the part of mediator
between him and the Count, and furnished him with proper instructions
for that purpose. Accordingly the landlord, on his return, told Fathom
that he was sure the solicitor was not a man for this world; for that
he had left him deprived of his senses, and praying to God with great
devotion for mercy to his murderer. He then exhorted him, with many
protestations of friendship, to compromise the unhappy affair by
exchanging releases with the attorney before his delirium should be
known, otherwise he would bring himself into a most dangerous
premunire, whether the plaintiff should die of his wound, or live to
prosecute him for assault. “And with regard to your charge of robbery
against him,” said he, “as it is no more than a base suspicion,
unsupported by the least shadow of evidence, the bill would be thrown
out, and then he might sue you for damages. I therefore, out of pure
friendship and good-nature, advise you to compromise the affair, and,
if you think proper, will endeavour to bring about a mutual release.”

Our hero, whose passion was by this time pretty well cooled, saw reason
for assenting to the proposal; upon which the deed was immediately
executed, the mediator’s bill was discharged, and Ferdinand conveyed in
an hackney-coach to prison, after he had empowered his own landlord to
discharge his servants, and convert his effects into ready money. Thus,
he saw himself, in the course of a few hours, deprived of his
reputation, rank, liberty, and friends; and his fortune reduced from
two thousand pounds to something less than two hundred, fifty of which
he had carried to jail in his pocket.

END OF VOL. I.




 THE ADVENTURES OF FERDINAND COUNT FATHOM

by Tobias Smollett


Titlepage

COMPLETE IN TWO PARTS




 PART II.


With the Author’s Preface, and an Introduction by G. H. Maynadier,
Ph.D. Department of English, Harvard University.




THE ADVENTURES OF FERDINAND COUNT FATHOM




CHAPTER THIRTY-NINE

OUR ADVENTURER IS MADE ACQUAINTED WITH A NEW SCENE OF LIFE.


Just as he entered these mansions of misery, his ears were invaded with
a hoarse and dreadful voice, exclaiming, “You, Bess Beetle, score a
couple of fresh eggs, a pennyworth of butter, and half a pint of
mountain to the king; and stop credit till the bill is paid:—He is now
debtor for fifteen shillings and sixpence, and d—n me if I trust him
one farthing more, if he was the best king in Christendom. And, d’ye
hear, send Ragged-head with five pounds of potatoes for Major
Macleaver’s supper, and let him have what drink he wants; the fat widow
gentlewoman from Pimlico has promised to quit his score. Sir Mungo
Barebones may have some hasty pudding and small beer, though I don’t
expect to see his coin, no more than to receive the eighteen pence I
laid out for a pair of breeches to his backside—what then? he’s a quiet
sort of a body, and a great scholar, and it was a scandal to the place
to see him going about in that naked condition. As for the mad
Frenchman with the beard, if you give him so much as a cheese-paring,
you b—ch, I’ll send you back to the hole, among your old companions; an
impudent dog! I’ll teach him to draw his sword upon the governor of an
English county jail. What! I suppose he thought he had to do with a
French hang-tang-dang, rabbit him! he shall eat his white feather,
before I give him credit for a morsel of bread.”

Although our adventurer was very little disposed, at this juncture, to
make observations foreign to his own affairs, he could not help taking
notice of these extraordinary injunctions; especially those concerning
the person who was entitled king, whom, however, he supposed to be some
prisoner elected as the magistrate by the joint suffrage of his
fellows. Having taken possession of his chamber, which he rented at
five shillings a week, and being ill at ease in his own thoughts, he
forthwith secured his door, undressed, and went to bed, in which,
though it was none of the most elegant or inviting couches, he enjoyed
profound repose after the accumulated fatigues and mortifications of
the day. Next morning, after breakfast, the keeper entered his
apartment, and gave him to understand, that the gentlemen under his
care, having heard of the Count’s arrival, had deputed one of their
number to wait upon him with the compliments of condolence suitable to
the occasion, and invite him to become a member of their society. Our
hero could not politely dispense with this instance of civility, and
their ambassador being instantly introduced by the name of Captain
Minikin, saluted him with great solemnity.

This was a person equally remarkable for his extraordinary figure and
address; his age seemed to border upon forty, his stature amounted to
five feet, his visage was long, meagre, and weather-beaten, and his
aspect, though not quite rueful, exhibited a certain formality, which
was the result of care and conscious importance. He was very little
encumbered with flesh and blood; yet what body he had was well
proportioned, his limbs were elegantly turned, and by his carriage he
was well entitled to that compliment which we pay to any person when we
say he has very much the air of a gentleman. There was also an evident
singularity in his dress, which, though intended as an improvement,
appeared to be an extravagant exaggeration of the mode, and at once
evinced him an original to the discerning eyes of our adventurer, who
received him with his usual complaisance, and made a very eloquent
acknowledgment of the honour and satisfaction he received from the
visit of the representative, and the hospitality of his constituents.
The captain’s peculiarities were not confined to his external
appearance; for his voice resembled the sound of a bassoon, or the
aggregate hum of a whole bee-hive, and his discourse was almost nothing
else than a series of quotations from the English poets, interlarded
with French phrases, which he retained for their significance, on the
recommendation of his friends, being himself unacquainted with that or
any other outlandish tongue.

Fathom, finding this gentleman of a very communicative disposition,
thought he could not have a fairer opportunity of learning the history
of his fellow-prisoners; and, turning the conversation on that subject,
was not disappointed in his expectation. “I don’t doubt, sir,” said he,
with the utmost solemnity of declamation, “but you look with horror
upon every object that surrounds you in this uncomfortable place; but,
nevertheless, here are some, who, as my friend Shakespeare has it, have
seen better days, and have with holy bell been knolled to church; and
sat at good men’s feasts, and wiped their eyes of drops that sacred
pity hath engendered. You must know, sir, that, exclusive of the
canaille, or the profanum vulgus, as they are styled by Horace, there
are several small communities in the jail, consisting of people who are
attracted by the manners and dispositions of each other; for this
place, sir, is quite a microcosm, and as the great world, so is this, a
stage, and all the men and women merely players. For my own part, sir,
I have always made it a maxim to associate with the best of company I
can find. Not that I pretend to boast of my family or extraction;
because, you know, as the poet says, Vix ea nostra voco. My father,
’tis true, was a man that piqued himself upon his pedigree, as well as
upon his politesse and personal merit; for he had been a very old
officer in the army, and I myself may say I was born with a spontoon in
my hand. Sir, I have had the honour to serve his Majesty these twenty
years, and have been bandied about in the course of duty through all
the British plantations, and you see the recompense of all my service.
But this is a disagreeable subject, and therefore I shall waive it;
however, as Butler observes:

My only comfort is, that now
My dubbolt fortune is so low,
That either it must quickly end,
Or turn about again and mend.


“And now, to return from this digression, you will perhaps be surprised
to hear that the head or chairman of our club is really a sovereign
prince; no less, I’ll assure you, than the celebrated Theodore king of
Corsica, who lies in prison for a debt of a few hundred pounds. Heu!
quantum mutatus ab illo. It is not my business to censure the conduct
of my superiors; but I always speak my mind in a cavalier manner, and
as, according to the Spectator, talking to a friend is no more than
thinking aloud, entre nous, his Corsican majesty has been scurvily
treated by a certain administration. Be that as it will, he is a
personage of a very portly appearance, and is quite master of the
bienseance. Besides, they will find it their interest to have recourse
again to his alliance; and in that case some of us may expect to profit
by his restoration. But few words are best.

“He that maintains the second rank in our assembly is one Major
Macleaver, an Irish gentleman, who has served abroad; a soldier of
fortune, sir, a man of unquestionable honour and courage, but a little
overbearing, in consequence of his knowledge and experience. He is a
person of good address,—to be sure, and quite free of the mauvaise
honte, and he may have seen a good deal of service. But what then?
other people may be as good as he, though they have not had such
opportunities; if he speaks five or six languages, he does not pretend
to any taste in the liberal arts, which are the criterion of an
accomplished gentleman.

“The next is Sir Mungo Barebones, the representative of a very ancient
family in the north; his affairs are very much deranged, but he is a
gentleman of great probity and learning, and at present engaged in a
very grand scheme, which, if he can bring it to bear, will render him
famous to all posterity; no less than the conversion of the Jews and
the Gentiles. The project, I own, looks chimerical to one who has not
conversed with the author; but, in my opinion, he has clearly
demonstrated, from an anagrammatical analysis of a certain Hebrew word,
that his present Majesty, whom God preserve, is the person pointed at
in Scripture as the temporal Messiah of the Jews; and, if he could once
raise by subscription such a trifling sum as twelve hundred thousand
pounds, I make no doubt but he would accomplish his aim, vast and
romantic as it seems to be.

“Besides these, we have another messmate, who is a French chevalier, an
odd sort of a man, a kind of Lazarillo de Tormes, a caricatura; he
wears a long beard, pretends to be a great poet, and makes a d—-ed
fracas with his verses. The king has been obliged to exert his
authority over him more than once, by ordering him into close
confinement, for which he was so rash as to send his majesty a
challenge; but he afterwards made his submission, and was again taken
into favour. The truth is, I believe his brain is a little disordered,
and, he being a stranger, we overlook his extravagancies.

“Sir, we shall think ourselves happy in your accession to our society.
You will be under no sort of restraint; for, though we dine at one
table, every individual calls and pays for his own mess. Our
conversation, such as it is, will not, I hope, be disagreeable; and
though we have not opportunities of breathing the pure Arcadian air,
and cannot, ‘under the shade of melancholy boughs, lose and neglect the
creeping hours of time,’ we may enjoy ourselves over a glass of punch
or a dish of tea. Nor are we destitute of friends, who visit us in
these shades of distress. The major has a numerous acquaintance of both
sexes; among others, a first cousin of good fortune, who, with her
daughters, often cheer our solitude; she is a very sensible ladylike
gentlewoman, and the young ladies have a certain degagee air, that
plainly shows they have seen the best company. Besides, I will venture
to recommend Mrs. Minikin as a woman of tolerable breeding and
capacity, who, I hope, will not be found altogether deficient in the
accomplishments of the sex. So that we find means to make little
parties, in which the time glides away insensibly. Then I have a small
collection of books which are at your service. You may amuse yourself
with Shakespeare, or Milton, or Don Quixote, or any of our modern
authors that are worth reading, such as the Adventures of Loveill, Lady
Frail, George Edwards, Joe Thompson, Bampfylde Moore Carew, Young
Scarron, and Miss Betsy Thoughtless; and if you have a taste for
drawing, I can entertain you with a parcel of prints by the best
masters.”

A man of our hero’s politeness could not help expressing himself in the
warmest terms of gratitude for this courteous declaration. He thanked
the captain in particular for his obliging offers, and begged he would
be so good as to present his respects to the society, of which he
longed to be a member. It was determined, therefore, that Minikin
should return in an hour, when the Count would be dressed, in order to
conduct him into the presence of his majesty; and he had already taken
his leave for the present, when all of a sudden he came back, and
taking hold of a waistcoat that lay upon a chair, “Sir,” said he, “give
me leave to look at that fringe; I think it is the most elegant
knitting I ever saw. But pray, sir, are not these quite out of fashion?
I thought plain silk, such as this that I wear, had been the mode, with
the pockets very low.” Before Fathom had time to make any sort of
reply, he took notice of his hat and pumps; the first of which, he
said, was too narrow in the brims, and the last an inch too low in the
heels. Indeed, they formed a remarkable contrast with his own; for,
exclusive of the fashion of the cock, which resembled the form of a
Roman galley, the brim of his hat, if properly spread, would have
projected a shade sufficient to shelter a whole file of musketeers from
the heat of a summer’s sun; and the heels of his shoes were so high as
to raise his feet three inches at least from the surface of the earth.

Having made these observations, for the credit of his taste, he
retired, and returning at the time appointed, accompanied Ferdinand to
the apartment of the king, at the doors of which their ears were
invaded with a strange sound, being that of a human voice imitating the
noise of a drum. The captain, hearing this alarm, made a full stop,
and, giving the Count to understand that his majesty was busy, begged
he would not take it amiss, if the introduction should be delayed for a
few moments. Fathom, curious to know the meaning of what he had heard,
applied to his guide for information, and learned that the king and the
major, whom he had nominated to the post of his general-in-chief, were
employed in landing troops upon the Genoese territory; that is, that
they were settling beforehand the manner of their disembarkation.

He then, by the direction of his conductor, reconnoitred them through
the keyhole, and perceived the sovereign and his minister sitting on
opposite sides of a deal board table, covered with a large chart or
map, upon which he saw a great number of mussel and oyster shells
ranged in a certain order, and, at a little distance, several regular
squares and columns made of cards cut in small pieces. The prince
himself, whose eyes were reinforced by spectacles, surveyed this
armament with great attention, while the general put the whole in
action, and conducted their motions by beat of drum. The mussel-shells,
according to Minikin’s explanation, represented the transports, the
oyster-shells were considered as the men-of-war that covered the troops
in landing, and the pieces of card exhibited the different bodies into
which the army was formed upon its disembarkation.

As an affair of such consequence could not be transacted without
opposition, they had provided divers ambuscades, consisting of the
enemy, whom they represented by grey peas; and accordingly General
Macleaver, perceiving the said grey peas marching along shore to attack
his forces before they could be drawn up in battalia, thus addressed
himself to the oyster-shells, in an audible voice:—“You men-of-war,
don’t you see the front of the enemy advancing, and the rest of the
detachment following out of sight? Arrah! the devil burn you, why don’t
you come ashore and open your batteries?” So saying, he pushed the
shells towards the breach, performed the cannonading with his voice,
the grey peas were soon put in confusion, the general was beat, the
cards marched forwards in order of battle, and the enemy having
retreated with great precipitation, they took possession of their
ground without farther difficulty.




CHAPTER FORTY

HE CONTEMPLATES MAJESTY AND ITS SATELLITES IN ECLIPSE.


This expedition being happily finished, General Macleaver put the whole
army, navy, transports, and scene of action into a canvas bag, the
prince unsaddled his nose, and Captain Minikin being admitted, our hero
was introduced in form. Very gracious was the reception he met with
from his majesty, who, with a most princely demeanour, welcomed him to
court, and even seated him on his right hand, in token of particular
regard. True it is, this presence-chamber was not so superb, nor the
appearance of the king so magnificent, as to render such an honour
intoxicating to any person of our hero’s coolness and discretion. In
lieu of tapestry, the apartment was hung with halfpenny ballads, a
truckle-bed without curtains supplied the place of a canopy, and
instead of a crown his majesty wore a woollen night-cap. Yet, in spite
of these disadvantages, there was an air of dignity in his deportment,
and a nice physiognomist would have perceived something majestic in the
features of his countenance.

He was certainly a personage of very prepossessing mien; his manners
were engaging, his conversation agreeable, and any man whose heart was
subject to the meltings of humanity would have deplored his distress,
and looked upon him as a most pathetic instance of that miserable
reverse to which all human grandeur is exposed. His fall was even
greater than that of Belisarius, who, after having obtained many
glorious victories over the enemies of his country, is said to have
been reduced to such extremity of indigence, that, in his old age, when
he was deprived of his eyesight, he sat upon the highway like a common
mendicant, imploring the charity of passengers in the piteous
exclamation of Date obolum Belisario; that is, “Spare a farthing to
your poor old soldier Belisarius.” I say, this general’s disgrace was
not so remarkable as that of Theodore, because he was the servant of
Justinian, consequently his fortune depended upon the nod of that
emperor; whereas the other actually possessed the throne of sovereignty
by the best of all titles, namely, the unanimous election of the people
over whom he reigned; and attracted the eyes of all Europe, by the
efforts he made in breaking the bands of oppression, and vindicating
that liberty which is the birthright of man.

The English of former days, alike renowned for generosity and valour,
treated those hostile princes, whose fate it was to wear their chains,
with such delicacy of benevolence, as even dispelled the horrors of
captivity; but their posterity of this refined age feel no compunction
at seeing an unfortunate monarch, their former friend, ally, and
partisan, languish amidst the miseries of a loathsome jail, for a
paltry debt contracted in their own service. But, moralising apart, our
hero had not long conversed with this extraordinary debtor, who in his
present condition assumed no other title than that of Baron, than he
perceived in him a spirit of Quixotism, which all his experience,
together with the vicissitudes of his fortune, had not been able to
overcome. Not that his ideas soared to such a pitch of extravagant hope
as that which took possession of his messmates, who frequently
quarrelled one with another about the degrees of favour to which they
should be entitled after the king’s restoration; but he firmly believed
that affairs would speedily take such a turn in Italy, as would point
out to the English court the expediency of employing him again; and his
persuasion seemed to support him against every species of poverty and
mortification.

While they were busy in trimming the balance of power on the other side
of the Alps, their deliberations were interrupted by the arrival of a
scullion, who came to receive their orders touching the bill of fare
for dinner, and his majesty found much more difficulty in settling this
important concern, than in compromising all the differences between the
Emperor and the Queen of Spain. At length, however, General Macleaver
undertook the office of purveyor for his prince; Captain Minikin
insisted upon treating the Count; and in a little time the table was
covered with a cloth, which, for the sake of my delicate readers, I
will not attempt to describe.

At this period they were joined by Sir Mungo Barebones, who, having
found means to purchase a couple of mutton chops, had cooked a mess of
broth, which he now brought in a saucepan to the general rendezvous.
This was the most remarkable object which had hitherto presented itself
to the eyes of Fathom. Being naturally of a meagre habit, he was, by
indigence and hard study, wore almost to the bone, and so bended
towards the earth, that in walking his body described at least 150
degrees of a circle. The want of stockings and shoes he supplied with a
jockey straight boot and an half jack. His thighs and middle were cased
in a monstrous pair of brown trunk breeches, which the keeper bought
for his use from the executor of a Dutch seaman who had lately died in
the jail. His shirt retained no signs of its original colour, his body
was shrouded in an old greasy tattered plaid nightgown; a blue and
white handkerchief surrounded his head, and his looks betokened that
immense load of care which he had voluntarily incurred for the eternal
salvation of sinners. Yet this figure, uncouth as it was, made his
compliments to our adventurer in terms of the most elegant address,
and, in the course of conversation, disclosed a great fund of valuable
knowledge. He had appeared in the great world, and borne divers offices
of dignity and trust with universal applause. His courage was
undoubted, his morals were unimpeached, and his person held in great
veneration and esteem; when his evil genius engaged him in the study of
Hebrew, and the mysteries of the Jewish religion, which fairly
disordered his brain, and rendered him incapable of managing his
temporal affairs. When he ought to have been employed in the functions
of his post, he was always wrapt in visionary conferences with Moses on
the Mount; rather than regulate the economy of his household, he chose
to exert his endeavours in settling the precise meaning of the word
Elohim; and having discovered that now the period was come, when the
Jews and Gentiles would be converted, he postponed every other
consideration, in order to facilitate that great and glorious event.

By this time Ferdinand had seen every member of the club, except the
French chevalier, who seemed to be quite neglected by the society; for
his name was not once mentioned during this communication, and they sat
down to dinner, without asking whether he was dead or alive. The king
regaled himself with a plate of ox-cheek; the major, who complained
that his appetite had forsaken him, amused himself with some forty hard
eggs, malaxed with salt butter; the knight indulged upon his soup and
bouilli, and the captain entertained our adventurer with a neck of veal
roasted with potatoes; but before Fathom could make use of his knife
and fork, he was summoned to the door, where he found the chevalier in
great agitation, his eyes sparkling like coals of fire.

Our hero was not a little surprised at this apparition, who, having
asked pardon for the freedom he had used, observed, that, understanding
the Count was a foreigner, he could not dispense with appealing to him
concerning an outrage he had suffered from the keeper, who, without any
regard to his rank or misfortunes, had been base enough to refuse him
credit for a few necessaries, until he could have a remittance from his
steward in France; he therefore conjured Count Fathom, as a stranger
and nobleman like himself, to be the messenger of defiance, which he
resolved to send to that brutal jailor, that, for the future, he might
learn to make proper distinctions in the exercise of his function.

Fathom, who had no inclination to offend this choleric Frenchman,
assured him that he might depend upon his friendship; and, in the
meantime, prevailed upon him to accept of a small supply, in
consequence of which he procured a pound of sausages, and joined the
rest of the company without delay; making a very suitable addition to
such an assemblage of rarities. Though his age did not exceed thirty
years, his beard, which was of a brindled hue, flowed down, like
Aaron’s, to his middle. Upon his legs he wore red stockings rolled up
over the joint of the knee, his breeches were of blue drab, with vellum
button-holes, and garters of gold lace, his waistcoat of scarlet, his
coat of rusty black cloth, his hair, twisted into a ramilie, hung down
to his rump, of the colour of jet, and his hat was adorned with a white
feather.

This original had formed many ingenious schemes to increase the glory
and grandeur of France, but was discouraged by Cardinal Fleury, who, in
all appearance, jealous of his great talents, not only rejected his
projects, but even sent him to prison, on pretence of being offended at
his impertinence. Perceiving that, like the prophet, he had no honour
in his own country, he no sooner obtained his release, than he retired
to England, where he was prompted by his philanthropy to propose an
expedient to our ministry, which would have saved a vast effusion of
blood and treasure; this was an agreement between the Queen of Hungary
and the late Emperor, to decide their pretensions by a single combat;
in which case he offered himself as the Bavarian champion; but in this
endeavour he also proved unsuccessful. Then turning his attention to
the delights of poetry, he became so enamoured of the muse, that he
neglected every other consideration, and she as usual gradually
conducted him to the author’s never-failing goal—a place of rest
appointed for all those sinners whom the profane love of poesy hath led
astray.




CHAPTER FORTY-ONE

ONE QUARREL IS COMPROMISED, AND ANOTHER DECIDED BY UNUSUAL ARMS.


Among other topics of conversation that were discussed at this genial
meeting, Sir Mungo’s scheme was brought upon the carpet by his majesty,
who was graciously pleased to ask how his subscription filled? To this
interrogation the knight answered, that he met with great opposition
from a spirit of levity and self-conceit, which seemed to prevail in
this generation, but that no difficulties should discourage him from
persevering in his duty; and he trusted in God, that, in a very little
time, he should be able to confute and overthrow the false philosophy
of the moderns, and to restore the writings of Moses to that
pre-eminence and veneration which is due to an inspired author. He
spoke of the immortal Newton with infinite contempt, and undertook to
extract from the Pentateuch a system of chronology which would
ascertain the progress of time since the fourth day of the creation to
the present hour, with such exactness, that not one vibration of a
pendulum should be lost; nay, he affirmed that the perfection of all
arts and sciences might be attained by studying these secret memoirs,
and that he himself did not despair of learning from them the art of
transmuting baser metals into gold.

The chevalier, though he did not pretend to contradict these
assertions, was too much attached to his own religion to acquiesce in
the knight’s project of converting the Jews and the Gentiles to the
Protestant heresy, which, he said, God Almighty would never suffer to
triumph over the interests of his own Holy Catholic Church. This
objection produced abundance of altercation between two very unequal
disputants; and the Frenchman, finding himself puzzled by the learning
of his antagonist, had recourse to the argumentum ad hominem, by laying
his hand upon his sword, and declaring that he was ready to lose the
last drop of his blood in opposition to such a damnable scheme.

Sir Mungo, though in all appearance reduced to the last stage of animal
existence, no sooner heard this epithet applied to his plan, than his
eyes gleamed like lightning, he sprung from his seat with the agility
of a grasshopper, and, darting himself out at the door like an arrow
from a bow, reappeared in a moment with a long rusty weapon, which
might have been shown among a collection of rarities as the sword of
Guy Earl of Warwick. This implement he brandished over the chevalier’s
head with the dexterity of an old prize-fighter, exclaiming, in the
French language, “Thou art a profane wretch marked out for the
vengeance of Heaven, whose unworthy minister I am, and here thou shalt
fall by the sword of the Lord and of Gideon.”

The chevalier, unterrified by this dreadful salutation, desired he
would accompany him to a more convenient place; and the world might
have been deprived of one or both these knights-errant, had not General
Macleaver, at the desire of his majesty, interposed, and found means to
bring matters to an accommodation.

In the afternoon the society was visited by the major’s cousin and her
daughters, who no sooner appeared than they were recognised by our
adventurer, and his acquaintance with them renewed in such a manner as
alarmed the delicacy of Captain Minikin, who in the evening repaired to
the Count’s apartment, and with a formal physiognomy, accosted him in
these words: “Sir, I beg pardon for this intrusion, but I come to
consult you about an affair in which my honour is concerned; and a
soldier without honour, you know, is no better than a body without a
soul. I have always admired that speech of Hotspur in the first part of
Henry the Fourth:

By Heaven, methinks it were an easy leap,
To pluck bright honour from the pale-fac’d moon;
Or dive into the bottom of the deep,
Where fathom-line could never touch the ground,
And pluck up drowned honour by the locks—


“There is a boldness and ease in the expression, and the images are
very picturesque. But, without any further preamble, pray, sir, give me
leave to ask how long you have been acquainted with those ladies who
drank tea with us this afternoon. You’ll forgive the question, sir,
when I tell you that Major Macleaver introduced Mrs. Minikin to them as
to ladies of character, and, I don’t know how, sir, I have a sort of
presentiment that my wife has been imposed upon. Perhaps I may be
mistaken, and God grant I may. But there was a je ne sais quoi in their
behaviour to-day, which begins to alarm my suspicion. Sir, I have
nothing but my reputation to depend upon, and I hope you will excuse
me, when I earnestly beg to know what rank they maintain in life.”

Fathom, without minding the consequence, told him, with a simper, that
he knew them to be very good-natured ladies, who devoted themselves to
the happiness of mankind. This explanation had no sooner escaped from
his lips, than the captain’s face began to glow with indignation, his
eyes seemed bursting from their spheres, he swelled to twice his
natural dimensions, and, raising himself on his tiptoes, pronounced, in
a strain that emulated thunder, “Blood! sir, you seem to make very
light of the matter, but it is no joke to me, I’ll assure you, and
Macleaver shall see that I am not to be affronted with impunity. Sir, I
shall take it as a singular favour if you will be the bearer of a
billet to him, which I shall write in three words; nay, sir, you must
give me leave to insist upon it, as you are the only gentleman of our
mess whom I can intrust with an affair of this nature.”

Fathom, rather than run the risk of disobliging such a punctilious
warrior, after having in vain attempted to dissuade him from his
purpose, undertook to carry the challenge, which was immediately penned
in these words:

“SIR,
You have violated my honour in imposing upon Mrs. Minikin your
pretended cousins as ladies of virtue and reputation. I therefore
demand such satisfaction as a soldier ought to receive, and expect you
will adjust with my friend Count Fathom the terms upon which you shall
be met by the much injured


GOLIAH MINIKIN.”


This morceau being sealed and directed, was forthwith carried by our
adventurer to the lodgings of the major, who had by this time retired
to rest, but hearing the Count’s voice, he got up and opened the door
in cuerpo, to the astonishment of Ferdinand, who had never before seen
such an Herculean figure. He made an apology for receiving the Count in
his birthday suit, to which he said he was reduced by the heat of his
constitution, though he might have assigned a more adequate cause, by
owning that his shirt was in the hands of his washerwoman; then
shrouding himself in a blanket, desired to know what had procured him
the honour of such an extraordinary visit. He read the letter with
great composure, like a man accustomed to such intercourse; then
addressing himself to the bearer, “I will be after diverting the
gentleman,” said he, “in any manner he shall think proper; but, by
Jesus, this is no place for such amusements, because, as you well know,
my dear Count, if both should be killed by the chance of war, neither
of us will be able to escape, and after the breath is out of his body,
he will make but a sorry excuse to his family and friends. But that is
no concern of mine, and therefore I am ready to please him in his own
way.”

Fathom approved of his remarks, which he reinforced with sundry
considerations, to the same purpose, and begged the assistance of the
major’s advice, in finding some expedient to terminate the affair
without bloodshed, that no troublesome consequences might ensue either
to him or to his antagonist, who, in spite of this overstraining
formality, seemed to be a person of worth and good-nature. “With all my
heart,” said the generous Hibernian, “I have a great regard for the
little man, and my own character is not to seek at this time of day. I
have served a long apprenticeship to fighting, as this same carcase can
testify, and if he compels me to run him through the body, by my shoul,
I shall do it in a friendly manner.”

So saying, he threw aside the blanket, and displayed scars and seams
innumerable upon his body, which appeared like an old patched leathern
doublet. “I remember,” proceeded this champion, “when I was a slave at
Algiers, Murphy Macmorris and I happened to have some difference in the
bagnio, upon which he bade me turn out. ‘Arra, for what?’ said I; ‘here
are no weapons that a gentleman can use, and you would not be such a
negro as to box like an English carman.’ After he had puzzled himself
for some time, he proposed that we should retire into a corner, and
funk one another with brimstone, till one of us should give out.
Accordingly we crammed half a dozen tobacco pipes with sulphur, and,
setting foot to foot, began to smoke, and kept a constant fire, until
Macmorris dropped down; then I threw away my pipe, and taking poor
Murphy in my arms, ‘What, are you dead?’ said I; ‘if you are dead,
speak.’ ‘No, by Jesus!’ cried he, ‘I an’t dead, but I’m speechless.’ So
he owned I had obtained the victory, and we were as good friends as
ever. Now, if Mr. Minikin thinks proper to put the affair upon the same
issue, I will smoke a pipe of brimstone with him to-morrow morning, and
if I cry out first, I will be after asking pardon for this supposed
affront.”

Fathom could not help laughing at the proposal, to which, however, he
objected on account of Minikin’s delicate constitution, which might
suffer more detriment from breathing in an atmosphere of sulphur than
from the discharge of a pistol, or the thrust of a small sword. He
therefore suggested another expedient in lieu of the sulphur, namely,
the gum called assafatida, which, though abundantly nauseous, could
have no effect upon the infirm texture of the lieutenant’s lungs. This
hint being relished by the major, our adventurer returned to his
principal, and having repeated the other’s arguments against the use of
mortal instruments, described the succedaneum which he had concerted
with Macleaver. The captain at first believed the scheme was calculated
for subjecting him to the ridicule of his fellow-prisoners, and began
to storm with great violence; but, by the assurances and address of
Fathom, he was at length reconciled to the plan, and preparations were
made on each side for this duel, which was actually smoked next day,
about noon, in a small closet, detached from the challenger’s
apartment, and within hearing of his majesty, and all his court,
assembled as witnesses and umpires of the contest.

The combatants, being locked up together, began to ply their engines
with great fury, and it was not long before Captain Minikin perceived
he had a manifest advantage over his antagonist. For his organs were
familiarised to the effluvia of this drug, which he had frequently used
in the course of an hypochondriac disorder; whereas Macleaver, who was
a stranger to all sorts of medicine, by his wry faces and attempts to
puke, expressed the utmost abhorrence of the smell that invaded his
nostrils. Nevertheless, resolved to hold out to the last extremity, he
continued in action until the closet was filled with such an
intolerable vapour as discomposed the whole economy of his entrails,
and compelled him to disgorge his breakfast in the face of his
opponent, whose nerves were so disconcerted by this disagreeable and
unforeseen discharge, that he fell back into his chair in a swoon, and
the major bellowed aloud for assistance. The door being opened, he ran
directly to the window, to inhale the fresh air, while the captain,
recovering from his fit, complained of Macleaver’s unfair proceeding,
and demanded justice of the arbitrators, who decided in his favour; and
the major being prevailed upon to ask pardon for having introduced Mrs.
Minikin to women of rotten reputation, the parties were reconciled to
each other, and peace and concord re-established in the mess.

Fathom acquired universal applause for his discreet and humane conduct
upon this occasion; and that same afternoon had an opportunity of
seeing the lady in whose cause he had exerted himself. He was presented
to her as the husband’s particular friend, and when she understood how
much she was indebted to his care and concern for the captain’s safety,
she treated him with uncommon marks of distinction; and he found her a
genteel, well-bred woman, not without a good deal of personal charms,
and a well-cultivated understanding.




CHAPTER FORTY-TWO

AN UNEXPECTED RENCONTRE, AND A HAPPY REVOLUTION IN THE AFFAIRS OF OUR
ADVENTURER.


As she did not lodge within the precincts of this garrison, she was one
day, after tea, conducted to the gate by the captain and the Count, and
just as they approached the turnkey’s lodge, our hero’s eyes were
struck with the apparition of his old companion Renaldo, son of his
benefactor and patron, the Count de Melvil. What were the emotions of
his soul, when he saw that young gentleman enter the prison, and
advance towards him, after having spoke to the jailor! He never doubted
that, being informed of his confinement, he was come to upbraid him
with his villany and ingratitude, and he in vain endeavoured to
recollect himself from that terror and guilty confusion which his
appearance had inspired; when the stranger, lifting up his eyes,
started back with signs of extreme amazement, and, after a considerable
pause, exclaimed, “Heaven and earth! Sure my eyes do not deceive me! is
not your name Fathom? It is, it must be my old friend and companion,
the loss of whom I have so long regretted!” With these words he ran
towards our adventurer, and, while he clasped him in his arms with all
the eagerness of affection, protested that this was one of the happiest
days he had ever seen.

Ferdinand, who, from this salutation, concluded himself still in
possession of Renaldo’s good opinion, was not deficient in expressions
of tenderness and joy; he returned his embraces with equal ardour, the
tears trickled down his cheeks, and that perturbation which proceeded
from conscious perfidy and fear, was mistaken by the unsuspecting
Hungarian for the sheer effects of love, gratitude, and surprise. These
first transports having subsided, they adjourned to the lodgings of
Fathom, who soon recollected his spirits and invention so well as to
amuse the other with a feigned tale of his having been taken by the
French, sent prisoner into Champagne, from whence he had written many
letters to Count Melvil and his son, of whom he could hear no tidings;
of his having contracted an intimacy with a young nobleman of France,
who died in the flower of his age, after having, in token of his
friendship, bequeathed to him a considerable legacy; by this he had
been enabled to visit the land of his forefathers in the character of a
gentleman, which he had supported with some figure, until he was
betrayed into a misfortune that exhausted his funds, and drove him to
the spot where he was now found. And he solemnly declared, that, far
from forgetting the obligation he owed to Count Melvil, or renouncing
the friendship of Renaldo, he had actually resolved to set out for
Germany on his return to the house of his patron in the beginning of
the week posterior to that in which he had been arrested.

Young Melvil, whose own heart had never known the instigations of
fraud, implicitly believed the story and protestations of Fathom; and
though he would not justify that part of his conduct by which the term
of his good fortune was abridged, he could not help excusing an
indiscretion into which he had been hurried by the precipitancy of
youth, and the allurements of an artful woman. Nay, with the utmost
warmth of friendship, he undertook to wait upon Trapwell, and endeavour
to soften him into some reasonable terms of composition.

Fathom seemed to be quite overwhelmed with a deep sense of all this
goodness, and affected the most eager impatience to know the
particulars of Renaldo’s fate, since their unhappy separation, more
especially his errand to this uncomfortable place, which he should
henceforth revere as the providential scene of their reunion. Nor did
he forget to inquire, in the most affectionate and dutiful manner,
about the situation of his noble parents and amiable sister.

At mention of these names, Renaldo, fetching a deep sigh, “Alas! my
friend,” said he, “the Count is no more; and, what aggravates my
affliction for the loss of such a father, it was my misfortune to be
under his displeasure at the time of his death. Had I been present on
that melancholy occasion, so well I knew his generosity and paternal
tenderness, that, sure I am, he would in his last moments have forgiven
an only son, whose life had been a continual effort to render himself
worthy of such a parent, and whose crime was no other than an
honourable passion for the most meritorious of her sex. But I was
removed at a fatal distance from him, and doubtless my conduct must
have been invidiously misrepresented. Be that as it will, my mother has
again given her hand in wedlock to Count Trebasi; by whom I have the
mortification to be informed that I am totally excluded from my
father’s succession; and I learn from other quarters, that my sister is
barbarously treated by this inhuman father-in-law. Grant, Heaven, I may
soon have an opportunity of expostulating with the tyrant upon that
subject.”

So saying, his cheeks glowed, and his eyes lightened with resentment.
Then he thus proceeded: “My coming hither to-day was with a view to
visit a poor female relation, from whom I yesterday received a letter,
describing her most deplorable situation, and soliciting my assistance;
but the turnkey affirms that there is no such person in the jail, and I
was on my way to consult the keeper, when I was agreeably surprised
with the sight of my dear Fathom.”

Our adventurer having wiped from his eyes the tears which were produced
by the news of his worthy patron’s death, desired to know the name of
that afflicted prisoner, in whose behalf he interested himself so much,
and Renaldo produced the letter, subscribed, “Your unfortunate cousin,
Helen Melvil.” This pretended relation, after having explained the
degree of consanguinity which she and the Count stood in to each other,
and occasionally mentioned some anecdotes of the family in Scotland,
gave him to understand that she had married a merchant of London, who,
by repeated losses in trade, had been reduced to indigence, and
afterwards confined to prison, where he then lay a breathless corpse,
having left her in the utmost extremity of wretchedness and want, with
two young children in the smallpox, and an incurable cancer in one of
her own breasts. Indeed, the picture she drew was so moving, and her
expressions so sensibly pathetic, that no person, whose heart was not
altogether callous, could peruse it without emotion. Renaldo had sent
two guineas by the messenger, whom she had represented as a trusty
servant, whose fidelity had been proof against all the distress of her
mistress; and he was now arrived in order to reinforce his bounty.

Fathom, in the consciousness of his own practices, immediately
comprehended the scheme of this letter, and confidently assured him
that no such person resided in the prison or in any other place. And
when his friend applied for information to the keeper, these assurances
were confirmed; and that stern janitor told him he had been imposed
upon by a stale trick, which was often practised upon strangers by a
set of sharpers, who make it their business to pick up hints of
intelligence relating to private families, upon which they build such
superstructures of fraud and imposition.

However piqued the young Hungarian might be to find himself duped in
this manner, he rejoiced at the occasion which had thrown Fathom in his
way; and, after having made him a tender of his purse, took his leave,
on purpose to wait upon Trapwell, who was not quite so untractable as
an enraged cuckold commonly is; for, by this time, he had accomplished
the best part of his aim, which was to be divorced from his wife, and
was fully convinced that the defendant was no more than a needy
adventurer, who, in all probability, would be released by an act of
parliament for the benefit of insolvent debtors; in which case, he, the
plaintiff, would reap no solid advantage from his imprisonment.

He, therefore, listened to the remonstrances of the mediator, and,
after much canvassing, agreed to discharge the defendant, in
consideration of two hundred pounds, which were immediately paid by
Count Melvil, who, by this deduction, was reduced to somewhat less than
thirty.

Nevertheless, he cheerfully beggared himself in behalf of his friend,
for whose release he forthwith obtained an order; and, next day, our
adventurer, having bid a formal adieu to his fellows in distress, and,
in particular, to his majesty, for whose restoration his prayers were
preferred, he quitted the jail, and accompanied his deliverer, with all
the outward marks of unutterable gratitude and esteem.

Surely, if his heart had been made of penetrable stuff, it would have
been touched by the circumstances of this redemption; but had not his
soul been invincible to all such attacks, these memoirs would possibly
never have seen the light.

When they arrived at Renaldo’s lodgings, that young gentleman honoured
him with other proofs of confidence and friendship, by giving him a
circumstantial detail of all the adventures in which he had been
engaged after Fathom’s desertion from the imperial camp. He told him,
that, immediately after the war was finished, his father had pressed
him to a very advantageous match, with which he would have complied,
though his heart was not at all concerned, had not he been inflamed
with the desire of seeing the world before he could take any step
towards a settlement for life. That he had signified his sentiments on
this head to the Count, who opposed them with unusual obstinacy, as
productive of a delay which might be fatal to his proposal; for which
reason he had retired incognito from his family, and travelled through
sundry states and countries, in a disguise by which he eluded the
inquiries of his parents.

That, in the course of these peregrinations, he was captivated by the
irresistible charms of a young lady, on whose heart he had the good
fortune to make a tender impression. That their mutual love had
subjected both to many dangers and difficulties, during which they
suffered a cruel separation; after the torments of which, he had
happily found her in England, where she now lived entirely cut off from
her native country and connexions, and destitute of every other
resource but his honour, love, and protection. And, finally, that he
was determined to combat his own desires, how violent soever they might
be, until he should have made some suitable provision for the
consequences of a stricter union with the mistress of his soul, that he
might not, by a precipitate marriage, ruin the person whom he adored.

This end he proposed to attain, by an application to the court of
Vienna, which he did not doubt would have some regard to his own
service, and that of his father; and thither he resolved to repair,
with the first opportunity, now that he had found a friend with whom he
could intrust the inestimable jewel of his heart.

He likewise gave our hero to understand, that he had been eight months
in England, during which he had lived in a frugal manner, that he might
not unnecessarily exhaust the money he had been able to raise upon his
own credit; that, hitherto, he had been obliged to defer his departure
for Germany on account of his attendance upon the mother of his
mistress, who was lately dead of sorrow and chagrin; and that, since he
resided in London, he had often heard of the celebrated Count Fathom,
though he never imagined that his friend Ferdinand could be
distinguished by that appellation.




CHAPTER FORTY-THREE

FATHOM JUSTIFIES THE PROVERB, “WHAT’S BRED IN THE BONE WILL NEVER COME
OUT OF THE FLESH.”


Some circumstances of this conversation made a deep impression upon the
mind of our adventurer, who nevertheless concealed his emotions from
the knowledge of his friend, and was next day introduced to that hidden
treasure of which Renaldo had spoken with such rapture and adoration.
It was not without reason he had expatiated upon the personal
attractions of this young lady, whom, for the present, we shall call
Monimia, a name that implies her orphan situation. When she entered the
room, even Fathom, whose eyes had been sated with beauty, was struck
dumb with admiration, and could scarce recollect himself so far as to
perform the ceremony of his introduction.

She seemed to be about the age of eighteen. Her stature was tall; her
motion graceful. A knot of artificial flowers restrained the luxuriancy
of her fine black hair, that flowed in shining ringlets adown her snowy
neck. The contour of her face was oval; her forehead remarkably high;
her complexion clean and delicate, though not florid; and her eyes were
so piercing, as to strike the soul of every beholder. Yet, upon this
occasion, one half of their vivacity was eclipsed by a languishing air
of melancholy concern; which, while it in a manner sheathed the edge of
her beauty, added a most engaging sweetness to her looks. In short,
every feature was elegantly perfect; and the harmony of the whole
ravishing and delightful.

It was easy to perceive the mutual sentiments of the two lovers at
meeting, by the pleasure that sensibly diffused itself in the
countenances of both. Fathom was received by her as the intimate friend
of her admirer, whom she had often heard of in terms of the most
sincere affection; and the conversation was carried on in the Italian
language, because she was a foreigner who had not as yet made great
proficiency in the knowledge of the English tongue. Her understanding
was such as, instead of diminishing, reinforced the prepossession which
was inspired by her appearance; and if the sum-total of her charms
could not melt the heart, it at least excited the appetite of Fathom to
such a degree, that he gazed upon her with such violence of desire, as
had never transported him before; and he instantly began to harbour
thoughts, not only destructive to the peace of his generous patron, but
also to the prudential maxims he had adopted on his first entrance into
life.

We have already recorded divers instances of his conduct to prove that
there was an intemperance in his blood, which often interfered with his
caution; and although he had found means to render this heat sometimes
subservient to his interest, yet, in all probability, Heaven mingled
the ingredient in his constitution, on purpose to counteract his
consummate craft, defeat the villany of his intention, and at least
expose him to the justice of the law, and the contempt of his
fellow-creatures.

Stimulated as he was by the beauty of the incomparable Monimia, he
foresaw that the conquest of her heart would cost him a thousand times
more labour and address than all the victories he had ever achieved;
for, besides her superior understanding, her sentiments of honour,
virtue, gratitude, religion, and pride of birth, her heart was already
engaged by the tenderest ties of love and obligation, to a man whose
person and acquired accomplishments at least equalled his own; and
whose connexion with him was of such a nature as raised an almost
insurmountable bar to his design; because, with what face could he
commence rival to the person whose family had raised him from want and
servility, and whose own generosity had rescued him from the miseries
of a dreary gaol?

Notwithstanding these reflections, he would not lay aside an idea which
so agreeably flattered his imagination. He, like every other projector
in the same circumstances, was so partial to his own qualifications, as
to think the lady would soon perceive a difference between him and
Renaldo that could not fail to turn to his advantage in her opinion. He
depended a good deal on the levity and inconstancy of the sex; and did
not doubt that, in the course of their acquaintance, he should profit
by that languor which often creeps upon and flattens the intercourse of
lovers cloyed with the sight and conversation of each other.

This way of arguing was very natural to a man who had never known other
motives than those of sensuality and convenience; and perhaps, upon
these maxims, he might have succeeded with nine-tenths of the fair sex.
But, for once, he erred in his calculation; Monimia’s soul was perfect,
her virtue impregnable. His first approaches were, as usual, performed
by the method of insinuation, which succeeded so well, that in a few
days he actually acquired a very distinguished share of her favour and
esteem. To this he had been recommended, in the warmest strain of
exaggerating friendship, by her dear Renaldo; so that, placing the most
unreserved confidence in his honour and integrity, and being almost
quite destitute of acquaintance, she made no scruple of owning herself
pleased with his company and conversation; and therefore he was never
abridged in point of opportunity. She had too much discernment to
overlook his uncommon talents and agreeable address, and too much
susceptibility to observe them with indifference. She not only regarded
him as the confidant of her lover, but admired him as a person whose
attachment did honour to Count Melvil’s choice. She found his discourse
remarkably entertaining, his politeness dignified with an air of
uncommon sincerity, and she was ravished with his skill in music, an
art of which she was deeply enamoured.

While he thus ingratiated himself with the fair Monimia, Renaldo
rejoiced at their intimacy, being extremely happy in the thought of
having found a friend who could amuse and protect the dear creature in
his absence. That she might be the better prepared for the temporary
separation which he meditated, he began to be less frequent in his
visits, or rather to interrupt, by gradual intermissions, the constant
attendance he had bestowed upon her since her mother’s death. This
alteration she was enabled to bear by the assiduities of Fathom, when
she understood that her lover was indispensably employed in negotiating
a sum of money for the purposes of his intended voyage. This was really
the case; for, as the reader hath been already informed, the provision
he had made for that emergency was expended in behalf of our
adventurer; and the persons of whom he had borrowed it, far from
approving of the use to which it was put, and accommodating him with a
fresh supply, reproached him with his benevolence as an act of
dishonesty to them; and, instead of favouring this second application,
threatened to distress him for what he had already received. While he
endeavoured to surmount these difficulties, his small reversion was
quite exhausted, and he saw himself on the brink of wanting the common
necessaries of life.

There was no difficulty which he could not have encountered with
fortitude, had he alone been concerned. But his affection and regard
for Monimia were of such a delicate nature, that, far from being able
to bear the prospect of her wanting the least convenience, he could not
endure that she should suspect her situation cost him a moment’s
perplexity; because he foresaw it would wring her gentle heart with
unspeakable anguish and vexation. This, therefore, he endeavoured to
anticipate by expressions of confidence in the Emperor’s equity, and
frequent declarations touching the goodness and security of that credit
from which he derived his present subsistence.




CHAPTER FORTY-FOUR

ANECDOTES OF POVERTY, AND EXPERIMENTS FOR THE BENEFIT OF THOSE WHOM IT
MAY CONCERN.


His affairs being thus circumstanced, it is not to be supposed that he
passed his time in tranquillity. Every day ushered in new demands and
fresh anxiety; for though his economy was frugal, it could not be
supported without money; and now not only his funds were drained, but
also his private friends tired of relieving his domestic necessities;
nay, they began to relinquish his company, which formerly they had
coveted; and those who still favoured him with their company embittered
that favour with disagreeable advice, mingled with impertinent reproof.
They loudly exclaimed against the last instance of his friendship for
Fathom, as a piece of wrong-headed extravagance, which neither his
fortune could afford nor his conscience excuse; and alleged that such
specimens of generosity are vicious in any man, let his finances be
never so opulent, if he has any relations of his own who need his
assistance; but altogether scandalous, not to say unjust, in a person
who depends for his own support on the favour of his friends.

These expostulations did not even respect the beauteous, the
accomplished, the gentle-hearted, the orphan Monimia. Although they
owned her perfections, and did not deny that it would be highly
meritorious in any man of fortune to make her happy, they disapproved
of Renaldo’s attachment to the fair beggar, made light of that intimate
union of hearts which subsisted between the two lovers, and which no
human consideration could dissolve; and some among them, in the
consummation of their prudence, ventured to hint a proposal of
providing for her in the service of some lady of fashion.

Any reader of sensibility will easily conceive how these admonitions
were relished by a young gentleman whose pride was indomitable, whose
notions of honour were scrupulously rigid and romantic, whose temper
was warm, and whose love was intense. Every such suggestion was as a
dagger to his soul; and what rendered the torture more exquisite, he
lay under obligations to those very persons whose selfish and sordid
sentiments he disdained; so that he was restricted by gratitude from
giving vent to his indignation, and his forlorn circumstances would not
permit him to renounce their acquaintance. While he struggled with
these mortifications, his wants grew more and more importunate, and his
creditors became clamorous.

Fathom, to whom all his grievances were disclosed, lamented his hard
hap with all the demonstrations of sympathy which he could expect to
find in such a zealous adherent. He upbraided himself incessantly as
the cause of his patron’s distress; took God to witness that he would
rather have perished in gaol than have enjoyed his liberty, had he
known it would have cost his dearest friend and benefactor one-tenth
part of the anguish he now saw him suffer; and, in conclusion, the
fervency of his affection glowed to such a degree, that he offered to
beg, steal, or plunder on the highway, for Renaldo’s assistance.

Certain it is, he might have recollected a less disagreeable expedient
than any of these to alleviate the pangs of this unhappy lover; for, at
that very period he was possessed of money and moveables to the amount
of a much greater sum than that which was necessary to remove the
severest pangs of the Count’s misfortune. But, whether he did not
reflect upon this resource, or was willing to let Melvil be better
acquainted with adversity, which is the great school of life, I shall
leave the reader to determine. Yet, so far was he from supplying the
wants of the young Hungarian, that he did not scruple to receive a
share of the miserable pittance which that gentleman made shift to
extort from the complaisance of a few companions, whose countenance he
still enjoyed.

Renaldo’s life was now become a sacrifice to the most poignant
distress. Almost his whole time was engrossed by a double scheme,
comprehending his efforts to render his departure practicable, and his
expedients for raising the means of daily bread. With regard to the
first, he exerted himself among a set of merchants, some of whom knew
his family and expectations; and, for the last, he was fain to depend
upon the assistance of a few intimates, who were not in a condition to
furnish him with sums of consequence. These, however, gradually dropped
off, on pretence of friendly resentment for his indiscreet conduct; so
that he found himself naked and deserted by all his former companions,
except one gentleman, with whom he had lived in the most unreserved
correspondence, as with a person of the warmest friendship, and the
most unbounded benevolence; nay, he had actually experienced repeated
proofs of his generosity; and such were the Count’s sentiments of the
gratitude, love, and esteem, which were due to the author of these
obligations, that he would have willingly laid down his own life for
his interest or advantage. He had already been at different times
accommodated by this benefactor with occasional supplies, amounting in
the whole to about forty or fifty pounds; and so fearful was he of
taking any step by which he might forfeit the goodwill of this
gentleman, that he struggled with unparelleled difficulty and vexation,
before he could prevail upon himself to put his liberality to another
proof.

What maxims of delicacy will not the dire calls of necessity infringe!
Reduced to the alternative of applying once more to that beneficence
which had never failed him, or of seeing Monimia starve, he chose the
first, as of two evils the least, and intrusted Fathom with a letter
explaining the bitterness of his case. It was not without trepidation
that he received in the evening from his messenger an answer to this
billet; but what were his pangs when he learned the contents! The
gentleman, after having professed himself Melvil’s sincere well-wisher,
gave him to understand, that he was resolved for the future to detach
himself from every correspondence which would be inconvenient for him
to maintain; that he considered his intimacy with the Count in that
light; yet, nevertheless, if his distress was really as great as he had
described it, he would still contribute something towards his relief;
and accordingly had sent by the bearer five guineas for that purpose;
but desired him to take notice, that, in so doing, he laid himself
under some difficulty.

Renaldo’s grief and mortification at this disappointment were
unspeakable. He now saw demolished the last screen betwixt him and the
extremity of indigence and woe; he beheld the mistress of his soul
abandoned to the bleakest scenes of poverty and want; and he deeply
resented the lofty strain of the letter, by which he conceived himself
treated as a worthless spendthrift and importunate beggar. Though his
purse was exhausted to the last shilling; though he was surrounded with
necessities and demands, and knew not how to provide another meal for
his fair dependent, he, in opposition to all the suggestions and
eloquence of Fathom, despatched him with the money and another billet,
intimating, in the most respectful terms, that he approved of his
friend’s new-adopted maxim, which, for the future, he should always
take care to remember; and that he had sent back the last instance of
his bounty, as a proof how little he was disposed to incommode his
benefactor.

This letter, though sincerely meant, and written in a very serious
mood, the gentleman considered as an ungrateful piece of irony, and in
that opinion complained to several persons of the Count’s acquaintance,
who unanimously exclaimed against him as a sordid, unthankful, and
profligate knave, that abused and reviled those very people who had
generously befriended him, whenever they found it inconvenient to
nourish his extravagance with further supplies. Notwithstanding these
accumulated oppressions, he still persevered with fortitude in his
endeavours to disentangle himself from this maze of misery. To these he
was encouraged by a letter which about this time he received from his
sister, importing, that she had good reason to believe the real will of
her father had been suppressed for certain sinister views; and desiring
him to hasten his departure for Hungary, where he would still find some
friends who were both able and willing to support his cause. He had
some trinkets left; the pawnbroker’s shop was still open; and hitherto
he made shift to conceal from Monimia the extent of his affliction.

The money-broker whom he employed, after having amused him with a
variety of schemes, which served no other purpose than that of
protracting his own job, at length undertook to make him acquainted
with a set of monied men who had been very venturous in lending sums
upon personal security; he was therefore introduced to their club in
the most favourable manner, after the broker had endeavoured to
prepossess them separately, with magnificent ideas of his family and
fortune.—By means of this anticipation he was received with a manifest
relaxation of that severity which people of this class mingle in their
aspects to the world in general; and they even vied with each other in
their demonstrations of hospitality and respect; for every one in
particular looked upon him as a young heir, who would bleed freely, and
mortgage at cent. per cent.

Renaldo, buoyed up with these exterior civilities, began to flatter
himself with hopes of success, which, however, were soon checked by the
nature of the conversation; during which the chairman upbraided one of
the members in open club for having once lent forty pounds upon slight
security. The person accused alleged, in his own defence, that the
borrower was his own kinsman, whose funds he knew to be sufficient;
that he had granted his bond, and been at the expense of insuring his
life for the money; and, in conclusion, had discharged it to the day
with great punctuality. These allegations were not deemed exculpatory
by the rest of the assembly, who with one voice pronounced him guilty
of unwarrantable rashness and indiscretion, which, in time coming, must
undoubtedly operate to the prejudice of his character and credit.

This was a bitter declaration to the young Count, who nevertheless
endeavoured to improve the footing he had gained among them, by
courting their company, conforming to their manners, and attentively
listening to their discourse. When he had cultivated them with great
assiduity for the space of some weeks, dined at their houses upon
pressing invitations, and received repeated offers of service and
friendship, believing that things were now ripe for the purpose, he,
one day, at a tavern to which he had invited him to dinner, ventured to
disclose his situation to him whose countenance was the least
unpromising; and as he introduced the business with a proposal of
borrowing money, he perceived his eyes sparkle with a visible alacrity,
from which he drew a happy presage. But, alas! this was no more than a
transient gleam of sunshine, which was suddenly obumbrated by the
sequel of his explanation; insomuch, that, when the merchant understood
the nature of the security, his visage was involved in a most
disagreeable gloom, and his eyes distorted into a most hideous
obliquity of vision; indeed, he squinted so horribly, that Renaldo was
amazed and almost affrighted at his looks, until he perceived that this
distortion proceeded from concern for a silver tobacco box which he had
laid down by him on the table, after having filled his pipe. As the
youth proceeded to unfold his necessities, the other became gradually
alarmed for this utensil, to which he darted his eyes askance in this
preternatural direction, until he had slyly secured it in his pocket.

Having made this successful conveyance, he shifted his eyes alternately
from the young gentleman to the broker for a considerable pause, during
which he in silence reproached the last for introducing such a beggarly
varlet to his acquaintance; then taking the pipe from his mouth, “Sir,”
said he, addressing himself to the Count, “if I had all the inclination
in the world to comply with your proposal, it is really not in my
power. My correspondents abroad have remitted such a number of bad
bills of late, that all my running cash hath been exhausted in
supporting their credit. Mr. Ferret, sure I am, you was not ignorant of
my situation; and I’m not a little surprised that you should bring the
gentleman to me on business of this kind; but, as the wise man
observes, Bray a fool in a mortar, and he’ll never be wise.” So saying,
with a most emphatic glance directed to the broker, he rung the bell,
and called for the reckoning; when, finding that he was to be the guest
of Renaldo, he thanked him drily for his good cheer, and in an abrupt
manner took himself away.

Though baffled in this quarter, the young gentleman would not despair;
but forthwith employed Mr. Ferret in an application to another of the
society; who, after having heard the terms of his commission, desired
him to tell his principal, that he could do nothing without the
concurrence of his partner, who happened to be at that time in one of
our American plantations. A third being solicited, excused himself on
account of an oath which he had lately taken on the back of a
considerable loss. A fourth being tried, made answer, that it was not
in his way. And a fifth candidly owned, that he never lent money
without proper security.

Thus the forlorn Renaldo tried every experiment without success, and
now saw the last ray of hope extinguished. Well-nigh destitute of
present support, and encompassed with unrelenting duns, he was obliged
to keep within doors, and seek some comfort in the conversation of his
charming mistress, and his faithful friend; yet, even there, he
experienced the extremest rigour of adverse fate. Every rap at the door
alarmed him with the expectation of some noisy tradesman demanding
payment. When he endeavoured to amuse himself with drawing, some
unlucky feature of the occasional portrait recalled the image of an
obdurate creditor, and made him tremble at the work of his own hands.
When he fled for shelter to the flattering creation of fancy, some
abhorred idea always started up amidst the gay vision, and dissolved
the pleasing enchantment.—Even the seraphic voice of Monimia had no
longer power to compose the anxious tumults of his mind. Every song she
warbled, every tune she played, recalled to his remembrance some scene
of love and happiness elapsed; and overwhelmed his soul with the woful
comparison of past and present fate. He saw all that was amiable and
perfect in woman, all that he held most dear and sacred upon earth,
tottering on the brink of misery, without knowing the danger of her
situation, and found himself unable to prevent her fall, or even to
forewarn her of the peril; for as we have already observed, his soul
could not brook the thought of communicating the tidings of distress to
the tender-hearted Monimia.




CHAPTER FORTY-FIVE

RENALDO’S DISTRESS DEEPENS, AND FATHOM’S PLOT THICKENS.


Such aggravated misfortune could not fail to affect his temper and
deportment. The continual efforts he made to conceal his vexation
produced a manifest distraction in his behaviour and discourse. He
began to be seized with horror at the sight of poor Monimia, whom he
therefore shunned as much as the circumstances of their correspondence
would allow; and every evening he went forth alone to some solitary
place, where he could, unperceived, give a loose to the transports of
his sorrow, and in silence meditate some means to lighten the burden of
his woe. His heart was sometimes so savaged with despair, which
represented mankind as his inveterate enemies, that he entertained
thoughts of denouncing war against the whole community, and supplying
his own wants with the spoils he should win. At other times he was
tempted with the desire of putting an end to his miseries and life
together. Yet these were but the transitory suggestions of temporary
madness, that soon yielded to the dictates of reason. From the
execution of the first he was restrained by his own notions of honour
and morality; and, from using the other expedient, he was deterred by
his love for Monimia, together with the motives of philosophy and
religion.

While in this manner he secretly nursed the worm of grief that preyed
upon his vitals, the alteration in his countenance and conduct did not
escape the eyes of that discerning young lady. She was alarmed at the
change, yet afraid to inquire into the source of it; for, being
ignorant of his distress, she could impute it to no cause in which her
happiness was not deeply interested. She had observed his strained
complaisance and extraordinary emotion. She had detected him in
repeated attempts to avoid her company, and taken notice of his regular
excursions in the dark. These were alarming symptoms to a lover of her
delicacy and pride. She strove in vain to put the most favourable
construction on what she saw; and, finally, imputed the effects of his
despondence to the alienation of his heart. Made miserable beyond
expression by these suspicions, she imparted them to Fathom, who, by
this time, was in full possession of her confidence and esteem, and
implored his advice touching her conduct in such a nice conjuncture.

This artful politician, who rejoiced at the effect of her penetration,
no sooner heard himself questioned on the subject, than he gave tokens
of surprise and confusion, signifying his concern to find she had
discovered what, for the honour of his friend, he wished had never come
to light. His behaviour on this occasion confirmed her fatal
conjecture; and she conjured him, in the most pathetic manner, to tell
her if he thought Renaldo’s heart had contracted any new engagement. At
this question, he started with signs of extreme agitation, and stifling
an artificial sigh, “Sure, madam,” said he, “you cannot doubt the
Count’s constancy—I am confident—he is certainly—I protest, madam, I am
so shocked.”

Here he made a full pause, as if the conflict between his integrity and
his friendship would not allow him to proceed, and summoned the
moisture into either eye—“Then are my doubts removed,” cried the
afflicted Monimia; “I see your candour in the midst of your attachment
to Renaldo; and will no longer torment you with impertinent
interrogations and vain complaints.” With these words, a flood of tears
gushed from her enchanting eyes, and she instantly withdrew into her
own apartment, where she indulged her sorrow to excess. Nor was her
grief unanimated with resentment. She was by birth, nature, and
education inspired with that dignity of pride which ennobles the human
heart; and this, by the circumstance of her present dependence, was
rendered extremely jealous and susceptible; insomuch that she could not
brook the least shadow of indifference, much less an injury of such a
nature, from the man whom she had honoured with her affections, and for
whom she had disobliged and deserted her family and friends.

Though her love was so unalterably fixed on this unhappy youth, that,
without the continuation of reciprocal regard, her life would have
become an unsupportable burden, even amidst all the splendour of
affluence and pomp; and although she foresaw, that, when his protection
should cease, she must be left a wretched orphan in a foreign land,
exposed to all the miseries of want; yet, such was the loftiness of her
displeasure, that she disdained to complain, or even demand an
explanation from the supposed author of her wrongs.

While she continued undetermined in her purpose, and fluctuating on
this sea of torture, Fathom, believing that now was the season for
working upon her passions, while they were all in commotion, became, if
possible, more assiduous than ever about the fair mourner, modelled his
features into a melancholy cast, pretended to share her distress with
the most emphatic sympathy, and endeavoured to keep her resentment
glowing by cunning insinuations, which, though apparently designed to
apologise for his friend, served only to aggravate the guilt of his
perfidy and dishonour. This pretext of friendly concern is the most
effectual vehicle for the conveyance of malice and slander; and a man’s
reputation is never so mortally stabbed, as when the assassin begins
with the preamble of, “For my own part, I can safely say that no man
upon earth has a greater regard for him than I have; and it is with the
utmost anguish and concern that I see him misbehave in such a manner.”
Then he proceeds to mangle his character, and the good-natured hearers,
concluding he is even blacker than he is represented, on the
supposition that the most atrocious circumstances are softened or
suppressed by the tenderness or friendship of the accuser, exclaim,
“Good lack! what a wretch he must be, when his best friends will no
longer attempt to defend him!” Nay, sometimes these well-wishers
undertake his defence, and treacherously betray the cause they have
espoused, by omitting the reasons that may be urged in his vindication.

Both these methods were practised by the wily Ferdinand, according to
the predominant passion of Monimia. When her indignation prevailed, he
expatiated upon his love and sincere regard for Renaldo, which, he
said, had grown up from the cradle, to such a degree of fervour, that
he would willingly part with life for his advantage. He shed tears for
his apostasy; but every drop made an indelible stain upon his
character; and, in the bitterness of his grief, swore, notwithstanding
his fondness for Renaldo, which had become a part of his constitution,
that the young Hungarian deserved the most infamous destiny for having
injured such perfection. At other times, when he found her melted into
silent sorrow, he affected to excuse the conduct of his friend. He
informed her, that the young gentleman’s temper had been uneven from
his infancy; that frailty was natural to man; that he might in time be
reclaimed by self-conviction; he even hinted, that she might have
probably ascribed to inconstancy, what was really the effect of some
chagrin which he industriously concealed from his participation. But,
when he found her disposed to listen to this last suggestion, he
destroyed the force of it, by recollecting the circumstances of his
nocturnal rambles, which, he owned, would admit of no favourable
construction.

By these means he blew the coals of her jealousy, and enhanced the
value of his own character at the same time; for she looked upon him as
a mirror of faith and integrity, and the mind being overcharged with
woe, naturally seeks some confidant, upon whose sympathy it can repose
itself. Indeed, his great aim was to make himself necessary to her
affliction, and settle a gossiping correspondence, in the familiarity
of which he hoped his purpose would certainly be answered.

Yet the exertion of these talents was not limited to her alone. While
he laid these trains for the hapless young lady, he was preparing
snares of another kind for her unsuspecting lover, who, for the
completion of his misery, about this time began to perceive marks of
disquiet and displeasure in the countenance and deportment of his
adored Monimia. For that young lady, in the midst of her grief,
remembered her origin, and over her vexation affected to throw a veil
of tranquillity, which served only to give an air of disgust to her
internal disturbance.

Renaldo, whose patience and philosophy were barely sufficient to bear
the load of his other evils, would have been quite overwhelmed with the
additional burden of Monimia’s woe, if it had not assumed this
appearance of disesteem, which, as he knew he had not deserved it,
brought his resentment to his assistance. Yet this was but a wretched
cordial to support him against the baleful reflections that assaulted
him from every quarter; it operated like those desperate remedies,
which, while they stimulate exhausted nature, help to destroy the very
fundamentals of the constitution. He reviewed his own conduct with the
utmost severity, and could not recollect one circumstance which could
justly offend the idol of his soul. The more blameless he appeared to
himself in this examination, the less excusable did her behaviour
appear. He tasked his penetration to discover the cause of this
alteration; he burned with impatience to know it; his discernment
failed him, and he was afraid, though he knew not why, to demand an
explanation. His thoughts were so circumstanced, that he durst not even
unbosom himself to Fathom, though his own virtue and friendship
resisted those sentiments that began to intrude upon his mind, with
suggestions to the prejudice of our adventurer’s fidelity.

Nevertheless, unable to endure the torments of such interesting
suspense, he at length made an effort to expostulate with the fair
orphan; and in an abrupt address, the effect of his fear and confusion,
begged to know if he had inadvertently done anything to incur her
displeasure. Monimia, hearing herself bluntly accosted in this unusual
strain, after repeated instances of his reserve and supposed
inconstancy, considered the question as a fresh insult, and, summoning
her whole pride to her assistance, replied, with affected tranquillity,
or rather with an air of scorn, that she had no title to judge, neither
did she pretend to condemn his conduct. This answer, so wide of that
tenderness and concern which had hitherto manifested itself in the
disposition of his amiable mistress, deprived him of all power to carry
on the conversation, and he retired with a low bow, fully convinced of
his having irretrievably lost the place he had possessed in her
affection; for, to his imagination, warped and blinded by his
misfortunes, her demeanour seemed fraught, not with a transient gleam
of anger, which a respectful lover would soon have appeased, but with
that contempt and indifference which denote a total absence of
affection and esteem. She, on the other hand, misconstrued his sudden
retreat; and now they beheld the actions of each other through the
false medium of prejudice and resentment. To such fatal
misunderstandings the peace and happiness of whole families often fall
a sacrifice.




CHAPTER FORTY-SIX

OUR ADVENTURER BECOMES ABSOLUTE IN HIS POWER OVER THE PASSIONS OF HIS
FRIEND, AND EFFECTS ONE HALF OF HIS AIM.


Influenced by this dire mistake, the breast of those unhappy lovers
began to be invaded with the horrors of jealousy. The tender-hearted
Monimia endeavoured to devour her griefs in silence; she in secret
bemoaned her forlorn fate without ceasing; her tears flowed without
intermission from night to morn, and from morn to night. She sought not
to know the object for which she was forsaken; she meant not to upbraid
her undoer; her aim was to find a sequestered corner, in which she
could indulge her sorrow; where she could brood over the melancholy
remembrance of her former felicity; where she could recollect those
happy scenes she had enjoyed under the wings of her indulgent parents,
when her whole life was a revolution of pleasures, and she was
surrounded with affluence, pomp, and admiration; where she could,
unmolested, dwell upon the wretched comparison between her past and
present condition, and paint every circumstance of her misery in the
most aggravating colours, that they might make the deeper impression
upon her mind, and the more speedily contribute to that dissolution for
which she ardently wished, as a total release from woe.

Amidst these pinings, she began to loathe all sustenance; her cheeks
grew wan, her bright eyes lost their splendour, the roses vanished from
her lips, and her delicate limbs could hardly support their burden; in
a word, her sole consolation was limited to the prospect of depositing
her sorrows in the grave; and her only wish was to procure a retreat in
which she might wait with resignation for that happy period. Yet this
melancholy comfort she could not obtain without the advice and
mediation of Fathom, whom she therefore still continued to see and
consult. While these consultations were held, Renaldo’s bosom was
ravaged with tempests of rage and distraction. He believed himself
superseded in the affection of his mistress, by some favoured rival,
whose success rankled at his soul; and though he scarce durst
communicate the suspicion to his own heart, his observation continually
whispered to him that he was supplanted by his friend Fathom; for
Monimia was totally detached from the conversation of every other man,
and he had of late noted their intercourse with distempered eyes.

These considerations sometimes transported him to such a degree of
frenzy, that he was tempted to sacrifice them both as traitors to
gratitude, friendship, and love; but such deliriums soon vanished
before his honour and humanity. He would not allow himself to think
amiss of Ferdinand, until some undoubted mark of his guilt should
appear; and this was so far from being the case, that hitherto there
was scarce a presumption. “On the contrary,” said he to himself, “I am
hourly receiving proofs of his sympathy and attachment. Not but that he
may be the innocent cause of my mishap. His superior qualifications may
have attracted the eye, and engaged the heart of that inconstant fair,
without his being sensible of the victory he has won; or, perhaps,
shocked at the conquest he hath unwillingly made, he discourages her
advances, tries to reason down her unjustifiable passion, and in the
meantime conceals from me the particulars, out of regard to my
happiness and quiet.”

Under cover of these favourable conjectures, our adventurer securely
prosecuted his scheme upon the unfortunate Monimia. He dedicated
himself wholly to her service and conversation, except at those times
when his company was requested by Renaldo, who now very seldom exacted
his attendance. In his ministry about the person of the beauteous
orphan, this cunning incendiary mingled such awful regard, such melting
compassion, as effectually screened him from the suspicion of
treachery, while he widened the fatal breach between her and her lover
by the most diabolical insinuations. He represented his friend as a
voluptuary, who gratified his own appetite without the least regard to
honour or conscience; and, with a show of infinite reluctance, imparted
some anecdotes of his sensuality, which he had feigned for the purpose;
then he would exclaim in an affected transport, “Gracious Heaven! is it
possible for any man who has the least title to perception or humanity
to injure such innocence and perfection! for my own part, had I been so
undeservedly happy—Heaven and earth! forgive my transports, madam, I
cannot help seeing and admiring such divine attractions. I cannot help
resenting your wrongs; it is the cause of virtue I espouse; it ought to
be the cause of every honest man.”

He had often repeated such apostrophes as these, which she ascribed to
nothing else than sheer benevolence and virtuous indignation, and
actually began to think he had made some impression upon her heart, not
that he now entertained the hope of an immediate triumph over her
chastity. The more he contemplated her character, the more difficult
the conquest seemed to be: he therefore altered his plan, and resolved
to carry on his operations under the shelter of honourable proposals,
foreseeing that a wife of her qualifications, if properly managed,
would turn greatly to the account of the husband, or, if her virtue
should prove refractory, that he could at any time rid himself of the
encumbrance, by decamping without beat of drum, after he should be
cloyed with possession.

Elevated by these expectations, he one day, in the midst of a
preconcerted rhapsody, importing that he could no longer conceal the
fire that preyed upon his heart, threw himself on his knees before the
lovely mourner, and imprinted a kiss on her fair hand. Though he did
not presume to take this liberty till after such preparation as he
thought had altogether extinguished her regard for Melvil, and paved
the way for his own reception in room of that discarded lover, he had
so far overshot his mark, that Monimia, instead of favouring his
declaration, started up, and retired in silence, her cheeks glowing
with shame, and her eyes gleaming with indignation.

Ferdinand no sooner recovered from the confusion produced by this
unexpected repulse, than he saw the necessity of coming to a speedy
determination, lest the offended fair one should appeal to Renaldo, in
which case they might be mutually undeceived, to his utter shame and
confusion; he therefore resolved to deprecate her anger by humble
supplications, and by protesting, that, whatever tortures he might
suffer by suppressing his sentiments, she should never again be
offended with a declaration of his passion.

Having thus appeased the gentle Monimia, and discovered that, in spite
of her resentment, his friend still kept possession of her heart, he
determined to work an effectual separation, so as that the young lady,
being utterly deserted by Melvil, should be left altogether in his
power. With this Christian intention, he began to sadden his visage
with a double shade of pensive melancholy, in the presence of Renaldo,
to stifle a succession of involuntary sighs, to answer from the
purpose, to be incoherent in his discourse, and, in a word, to act the
part of a person wrapt up in sorrowful cogitation.

Count Melvil, soon as he perceived these symptoms, very kindly inquired
into the cause of them, and was not a little alarmed to hear the artful
and evasive answers of Ferdinand, who, without disclosing the source of
his disquiet, earnestly begged leave to retire into some other corner
of the world. Roused by this entreaty, the Hungarian’s jealousy awoke,
and with violent agitation, he exclaimed, “Then are my fears too true,
my dear Fathom: I comprehend the meaning of your request. I have for
some time perceived an host of horrors approaching from that quarter. I
know your worth and honour. I depend upon your friendship, and conjure
you, by all the ties of it, to free me at once from the most miserable
suspense, by owning you have involuntarily captivated the heart of that
unhappy maiden.”

To this solemn interrogation he made no reply, but shedding a flood of
tears, of which he had always a magazine at command, he repeated his
desire of withdrawing, and took God to witness, that what he proposed
was solely for the quiet of his honoured patron and beloved friend.
“Enough,” cried the unfortunate Renaldo, “the measure of my woes is now
filled up.” So saying, he fell backwards in a swoon, from which he was
with difficulty recovered to the sensation of the most exquisite
torments. During this paroxysm, our adventurer nursed him with infinite
care and tenderness, he exhorted him to summon all his fortitude to his
assistance, to remember his forefathers, and exert himself in the
imitation of their virtues, to fly from those bewitching charms which
had enslaved his better part, to retrieve his peace of mind by
reflecting on the inconstancy and ingratitude of woman, and amuse his
imagination in the pursuit of honour and glory.

After these admonitions he abused his ears with a forged detail of the
gradual advances made to him by Monimia, and the steps he had taken to
discourage her addresses, and re-establish her virtue, poisoning the
mind of that credulous youth to such a degree, that, in all
probability, he would have put a fatal period to his own existence, had
not Fathom found means to allay the rage of his ecstasy, by the cunning
arrangement of opposite considerations. He set his pride against his
love, he opposed his resentment to his sorrow, and his ambition to his
despair. Notwithstanding the balance of power so settled among these
antagonists, so violent were the shocks of their successive conflicts,
that his bosom fared like a wretched province, harassed, depopulated,
and laid waste, by two fierce contending armies. From this moment his
life was nothing but an alternation of starts and reveries; he wept and
raved by turns, according to the prevailing gust of passion; food
became a stranger to his lips, and sleep to his eyelids; he could not
support the presence of Monimia, her absence increased the torture of
his pangs; and, when he met her by accident, he started back with
horror, like a traveller who chances to tread upon a snake.

The poor afflicted orphan, worn to a shadow with self-consuming
anguish, eager to find some lowly retreat, where she could breath out
her soul in peace, and terrified at the frantic behaviour of Renaldo,
communicated to Fathom her desire of removing, and begged that he would
take a small picture of her father, decorated with diamonds, and
convert them into money, for the expense of her subsistence. This was
the last pledge of her family, which she had received from her mother,
who had preserved it in the midst of numberless distresses, and no
other species of misery but that which she groaned under could have
prevailed upon the daughter to part with it; but, exclusive of other
motives, the very image itself, by recalling to her mind the honours of
her name, upbraided her with living in dependence upon a man who had
treated her with such indignity and ingratitude; besides, she flattered
herself with the hope that she should not long survive the loss of this
testimonial.

Our adventurer, with many professions of sorrow and mortification at
his own want of capacity to prevent such an alienation, undertook to
dispose of it to the best advantage, and to provide her with a cheap
and retired apartment, to which he would conduct her in safety, though
at the hazard of his life. In the meantime, however, he repaired to his
friend Renaldo, and, after having admonished him to arm his soul with
patience and philosophy, declared that Monimia’s guilty passion for
himself could no longer be kept within bounds, that she had conjured
him, in the most pressing manner, to assist her in escaping from an
house which she considered as the worst of dungeons, because she was in
it daily exposed to the sight and company of a man whom she detested,
and that she had bribed him to compliance with her request, not only
with repeated promises of eternal love and submission, but also with
the picture of her father set with diamonds, which she had hitherto
reserved as the last and greatest testimony of her affection and
esteem.

With these words he presented the fatal pledge to the eyes of the
astonished youth, upon whom it operated like the poisonous sight of the
basilisk, for in an instant, the whole passions of his soul were in the
most violent agitation. “What!” cried he, in an ecstasy of rage, “is
she so abandoned to perfidy, so lost to shame, so damned to constancy,
to gratitude, and virtuous love, as to meditate the means of leaving me
without decency, without remorse! to forsake me in my adversity, when
my hapless fortune can no longer flatter the pride and vanity of her
expectation! O woman! woman! woman! what simile shall I find to
illustrate the character of the sex? But I will not have recourse to
vain complaints and feeble exclamations. By Heaven! she shall not
’scape, she shall not triumph in her levity, she shall not exult in my
distress; no! I will rather sacrifice her to my just resentment, to the
injured powers of love and friendship. I will act the avenging minister
of Heaven! I will mangle that fair bosom, which contains so false a
heart! I will tear her to pieces, and scatter those beauteous limbs as
a prey to the beasts of the field, and the fowls of the air!”

Fathom, who expected this storm, far from attempting to oppose its
progress, waited with patience until its first violence was overblown;
then, assuming an air of condolence, animated with that resolution
which a friend ought to maintain on such occasions, “My dear Count,”
said he, “I am not at all surprised at your emotion, because I know
what an heart, susceptible as yours, must feel from the apostasy of one
who has reigned so long the object of your love, admiration, and
esteem. Your endeavours to drive her from your thoughts must create an
agony much more severe than that which divorces the soul from the body.
Nevertheless, I am so confident of your virtue and your manhood, as to
foresee, that you will allow the fair Monimia to execute that
resolution which she hath so unwisely taken, to withdraw herself from
your love and protection. Believe me, my best friend and benefactor,
this is a step, in consequence of which you will infallibly retrieve
your peace of mind. It may cost you many bitter pangs, it may probe
your wounds to the quick; but those pangs will be soothed by the gentle
and salutary wing of time, and that probing will rouse you to a due
sense of your own dignity and importance, which will enable you to
convert your attention to objects far more worthy of your
contemplation. All the hopes of happiness you had cherished in the
possession of Monimia are now irrecoverably blasted; her heart is now
debased beneath your consideration; her love is, without all doubt,
extinguished, and her honour irretrievably lost; insomuch, that, were
she to profess sorrow for her indiscretion, and implore your
forgiveness, with the most solemn promises of regarding you for the
future with unalterable fidelity and affection, you ought not to
restore her to that place in your heart which she hath so meanly
forfeited, because you could not at the same time reinstate her in the
possession of that delicate esteem without which there is no harmony,
no rapture, no true enjoyment in love.

“No, my dear Renaldo, expel the unworthy tenant from your bosom; allow
her to fill up the measure of her ingratitude, by deserting her lover,
friend, and benefactor. Your glory demands her dismission; the world
will applaud your generosity, and your own heart approve of your
conduct. So disencumbered, let us exert ourselves once more in
promoting your departure from this island, that you may revisit your
father’s house, do justice to yourself and amiable sister, and take
vengeance on the author of your wrongs; then dedicate yourself to
glory, in imitation of your renowned ancestors, and flourish in the
favour of your imperial patron.”

These remonstrances had such an effect upon the Hungarian, that his
face was lighted up with a transient gleam of satisfaction. He embraced
Ferdinand with great ardour, calling him his pride, his Mentor, his
good genius, and entreated him to gratify the inclination of that
fickle creature so far as to convey her to another lodging, without
loss of time, while he would, by absenting himself, favour their
retreat.

Our hero having obtained this permission, went immediately to the
skirts of the town, where he had previously bespoke a small, though
neat apartment, at the house of an old woman, widow of a French
refugee. He had already reconnoitred the ground, by sounding his
landlady, from whose poverty and complaisance he found reason to expect
all sorts of freedom and opportunity for the accomplishment of his aim
upon Monimia’s person. The room being prepared for her reception, he
returned to that disconsolate beauty, to whom he presented ten guineas,
which he pretended to have raised by pledging the picture, though he
himself acted as the pawnbroker on this occasion, for a very plain and
obvious reason.

The fair orphan was overjoyed to find her wish so speedily
accomplished. She forthwith packed up her necessaries in a trunk; and a
hackney-coach was called in the dusk of the evening, in which she
embarked with her baggage and conductor.

Yet she did not leave the habitation of Renaldo without regret. In the
instant of parting, the idea of that unfortunate youth was associated
with every well-known object that presented itself to her eyes; not as
an inconstant, ungenerous, and perjured swain, but as the accomplished,
the virtuous, the melting lover, who had captivated her virgin heart.
As Fathom led her to the door, she was met by Renaldo’s dog, which had
long been her favourite; and the poor animal fawning upon her as she
passed, her heart was overwhelmed with such a gush of tenderness, that
a flood of tears streamed down her cheeks, and she had well-nigh sunk
upon the floor.

Ferdinand, considering this emotion as the last tribute she would pay
to Renaldo, hurried her into the coach, where she soon recovered her
composure; and in a little time he ushered her into the house of Madam
la Mer, by whom she was received with great cordiality, and conducted
to her apartment, with which she found no other fault than that of its
being too good for one in her forlorn situation. Here, while the tear
of gratitude started in either eye, she thanked our adventurer for his
benevolence and kind concern, assuring him, that she would not fail
duly to beseech the Most High to shower down blessings upon him, as the
orphan’s friend and protector.

Fathom was not deficient in those expressions that were best adapted to
her present turn of mind. He observed, that what he had done was in
obedience to the dictates of common humanity, which would have prompted
him to assist any fellow-creature in distress; but that her peculiar
virtue and qualifications were such as challenged the utmost exertion
of his faculties in her service. He said, that surely Heaven had not
created such perfection in vain; that she was destined to receive as
well as to communicate happiness; and that the Providence, which she so
piously adored, would not fail, in due season, to raise her from
distress and affliction, to that honour and felicity for which she was
certainly ordained. In the meantime, he entreated her to depend upon
his service and fidelity, and the article of her board being settled,
he left her to the company and consolation of her discreet hostess, who
soon insinuated herself into the good opinion of her beauteous lodger.

While our hero was employed in this transaction, Renaldo sallied forth
in a sort of intoxication, which Fathom’s admonitions had inspired;
and, repairing to a certain noted coffee-house, engaged at chess with
an old French refugee, that his attention, by being otherwise employed,
might not stray towards that fatal object which he ardently wished to
forget. But, unluckily for him, he had scarce performed three moves of
the game, when his ears were exposed to a dialogue between two young
gentlemen, one of whom asked the other if he would go and see the
“Orphan” acted at one of the theatres; observing, as a farther
inducement, that the part of Monimia would be performed by a young
gentlewoman who had never appeared on the stage. At mention of that
name, Renaldo started; for though it did not properly belong to his
orphan, it was the appellation by which she had been distinguished ever
since her separation from her father’s house, and therefore it recalled
her to his imagination in the most interesting point of view. Though he
endeavoured to expel the image, by a closer application to his play,
every now and then it intruded upon his fancy, and at each return made
a stronger impression; so that he found himself in the situation of an
unfortunate bark stranded upon some hidden rock, which, when the wind
begins to blow, feels every succeeding wave more boisterous than the
former, until, with irresistible fury, they surmount her deck, sweep
everything before them, and dash her all to pieces.

The refugee had observed his first emotion, which he attributed to an
unforeseen advantage he himself had gained over the Hungarian; but
seeing him, in the sequel, bite his lip, roll his eyes, groan, writhe
his body, ejaculate incoherent curses, and neglect his game, the
Huguenot concluded that he was mad, and being seized with terror and
dismay, got up and scampered off, without ceremony or hesitation.

Melvil, thus left to the horrors of his own thought, which tortured him
with the apprehension of losing Monimia for ever, could no longer
combat that suggestion, but ran homewards with all the speed he could
exert, in order to prevent her retreat. When he crossed the threshold,
he was struck with such a damp of presaging fear, that he durst not in
person approach her apartment, nor even, by questioning the servant,
inform himself of the particulars he wanted to know. Yet his suspense
becoming more insupportable than his fear, he rushed from room to room
in quest of that which was not to be found; and, seeing Monimia’s
chamber door open, entered the deserted temple in a state of
distraction, calling aloud upon her name. All was silent, solitary, and
woful. “She is gone,” he cried, shedding a flood of tears, “she is for
ever lost; and all my hopes of happiness are fled!”

So saying, he sunk upon that couch on which Monimia had oft reposed,
and abandoned himself to all the excess of grief and despondence. In
this deplorable condition he was found by our adventurer, who gently
chid him for his want of resolution, and again repelled his sorrow, by
arousing his resentment against the innocent cause of his disquiet,
having beforehand forged the particulars of provocation.

“Is it possible,” said he, “that Renaldo can still retain the least
sentiment of regard for a fickle woman, by whom he has been so
ungratefully forsaken and so unjustly scorned? Is it possible he can be
so disturbed by the loss of a creature who is herself lost to all
virtue and decorum?—Time and reflection, my worthy friend, will cure
you of that inglorious malady. And the future misconduct of that
imprudent damsel will, doubtless, contribute to the recovery of your
peace. Her behaviour, at leaving the house where she had received so
many marks of the most delicate affection, was in all respects so
opposite to honour and decency, that I could scarce refrain from
telling her I was shocked at her deportment, even while she loaded me
with protestations of love. When a woman’s heart is once depraved, she
bids adieu to all restraint;—she preserves no measures. It was not
simply contempt which she expressed for Renaldo; she seems to resent
his being able to live under her disdain; and that resentment stoops to
objects unworthy of indignation. Even your dog was not exempted from
the effects of her displeasure. For, in her passage to the door, she
kicked the poor animal as one of your dependents; and, in our way to
the apartment I had provided for her, she entertained me with a
ludicrous comment upon the manner in which you first made her
acquainted with your passion. All that modesty of carriage, all that
chastity of conversation, all that dignity of grief, which she knew so
well how to affect, is now entirely laid aside, and, when I quitted
her, she seemed the most gay, giddy, and impertinent of her sex.”

“Gracious powers!” exclaimed Renaldo, starting from the couch, “am I
under the delusion of a dream; or are these things really so, as my
friend has represented them? Such a total and sudden degeneracy is
amazing! is monstrous and unnatural!”

“Such, my dear Count,” replied our hero, “is the caprice of a female
heart, fickle as the wind, uncertain as a calm at sea, fixed to no
principle, but swayed by every fantastic gust of passion, or of whim.
Congratulate yourself, therefore, my friend, upon your happy
deliverance from such a domestic plague—upon the voluntary exile of a
traitor from your bosom.—Recollect the dictates of your duty, your
discretion, and your glory, and think upon the honours and elevated
enjoyment for which you are certainly ordained. To-night let us over a
cheerful bottle anticipate your success; and to-morrow I will accompany
you to the house of an usurer, who, I am informed, fears no risk,
provided twenty per cent be given, and the borrower’s life insured.”




CHAPTER FORTY-SEVEN

THE ART OF BORROWING FURTHER EXPLAINED, AND AN ACCOUNT OF A STRANGE
PHENOMENON.


In this manner did the artful incendiary work upon the passions of the
credulous unsuspecting Hungarian, who pressed him to his breast with
the most cordial expressions of friendship, calling him his guardian,
his saviour, his second father, and gave himself up wholly to his
advice.

Next morning, according to the plan they had laid overnight, they
repaired to a tavern in the neighbourhood of the person to whom our
adventurer had been directed, and were fortunate enough to find him in
the house, transacting a money affair with a young gentleman who
treated him with his morning’s whet.

That affair being negotiated, he adjourned into another room with
Renaldo and his companion, who were not a little surprised to see this
minister of Plutus in the shape of a young sprightly beau, trimmed up
in all the foppery of the fashion; for they had hitherto always
associated with the idea of an usurer old age and rusty apparel. After
divers modish congees, he begged to know to what he should attribute
the honour of their message; when Ferdinand, who acted the orator, told
him, that his friend Count Melvil, having occasion for a sum of money,
had been directed to a gentleman of his name, “and, I suppose,” added
he, “you are the son of the person with whom the affair is to be
negotiated.”

“Sir,” said this petit-maitre, with a smile, “I perceive you are
surprised to see one of my profession in the appearance of a gentleman;
and perhaps your wonder will not cease, when I tell you, that my
education was liberal, and that I once had the honour to bear a
commission in the British army. I was indeed a first lieutenant of
marines, and will venture to say, that no officer in the service was
more delicate than myself in observing all the punctilios of honour. I
entertained the utmost contempt for all the trading part of the nation,
and suffered myself to be run through the body in a duel, rather than
roll with a brother-lieutenant, who was a broker’s son. But, thank
Heaven! I have long ago conquered all those ridiculous prejudices. I
soon observed, that without money there was no respect, honour, or
convenience to be acquired in life; that wealth amply supplied the want
of wit, merit, and pedigree, having influence and pleasure ever at
command; and that the world never failed to worship the flood of
affluence, without examining the dirty channels through which it
commonly flowed.

“At the end of the war, finding my appointments reduced to two
shillings and fourpence per day, and being addicted to pleasures which
I could not possibly purchase from such a fund, I sold my half-pay for
two hundred pounds, which I lent upon bond to a young officer of the
same regiment, on condition that he should insure his life, and restore
one-fourth part of the sum by way of premium. I happened to be lucky in
this first essay; for the borrower, having in six weeks expended the
money, made an excursion on the highway, was apprehended, tried,
convicted of felony, and cut his own throat, to prevent the shame of a
public execution; so that his bond was discharged by the insurers.

“In short, gentlemen, when I engaged in this business, I determined to
carry it on with such spirit, as would either make my fortune, or
entirely ruin me in a little time; and hitherto my endeavours have been
tolerably successful. Nor do I think my proceedings a whit more
criminal or unjust than those of other merchants, who strive to turn
their money to the best account. The commodity I deal in is cash; and
it is my business to sell it to the best advantage. A London factor
sends a cargo of goods to market, and if he gets two hundred per cent
upon the sale, he is commended for industry and address. If I sell
money for one-fourth part of that profit, certain persons will be so
unjust as to cry, Shame upon me, for taking such advantage of my
neighbour’s distress; not considering, that the trader took four times
the same advantage of those people who bought his cargo, though his
risk was not half so great as mine, and although the money I sold
perhaps retrieved the borrower from the very jaws of destruction. For
example, it was but yesterday I saved a worthy man from being arrested
for a sum of money, for which he had bailed a friend who treacherously
left him in the lurch. As he did not foresee what would happen, he had
made no provision for the demand, and his sphere of life secluding him
from all sorts of monied intercourse, he could not raise the cash by
his credit in the usual way of borrowing; so that, without my
assistance, he must have gone to jail; a disgrace which would have
proved fatal to the peace of his family, and utterly ruined his
reputation.—Nay, that very young gentleman, from whom I am just now
parted, will, in all probability, be indebted to me for a very genteel
livelihood. He had obtained the absolute promise of being provided for
by a great man, who sits at the helm of affairs in a neighbouring
kingdom; but, being destitute of all other resources, he could not have
equipped himself for the voyage, in order to profit by his lordship’s
intention, unless I had enabled him to pursue his good fortune.”

Renaldo was not a little pleased to hear this harangue, to which Fathom
replied with many florid encomiums upon the usurer’s good sense and
humane disposition; then he explained the errand of his friend, which
was to borrow three hundred pounds, in order to retrieve his
inheritance, of which he had been defrauded in his absence.

“Sir,” said the lender, addressing himself to Count Melvil, “I pretend
to have acquired by experience some skill in physiognomy; and though
there are some faces so deeply disguised as to baffle all the
penetration of our art, there are others, in which the heart appears
with such nakedness of integrity, as at once to recommend it to our
goodwill. I own your countenance prepossesses me in your favour; and
you shall be accommodated, upon those terms from which I never deviate,
provided you can find proper security, that you shall not quit the
British dominions; for that, with me, is a condition sine qua non.”

This was a very disagreeable declaration to Renaldo, who candidly
owned, that, as his concerns lay upon the Continent, his purpose was to
leave England without delay. The usurer professed himself sorry that it
was not in his power to oblige him; and, in order to prevent any
further importunity, assured them, he had laid it down as a maxim, from
which he would never swerve, to avoid all dealings with people whom, if
need should be, he could not sue by the laws of this realm.

Thus the intervention of one unlucky and unforeseen circumstance
blasted in an instant the budding hopes of Melvil, who, while his
visage exhibited the most sorrowful disappointment, begged to know, if
there was any person of his acquaintance who might be less scrupulous
in that particular.

The young gentleman directed them to another member of his profession,
and wishing them success, took his leave with great form and
complaisance. This instance of politeness was, however, no more than a
shift to disengage himself the more easily from their entreaties; for,
when the case was opened to the second usurer, he blessed himself from
such customers, and dismissed them with the most mortifying and boorish
refusal. Notwithstanding these repulses, Renaldo resolved to make one
desperate push; and, without allowing himself the least respite,
solicited, one by one, not fewer than fifteen persons who dealt in this
kind of traffic, and his proposals were rejected by each. At last,
fatigued by the toil, and exasperated at the ill success of his
expedition, and half mad with the recollection of his finances, which
were now drained to half-a-crown, “Since we have nothing to expect,”
cried he, “from the favour of Christians, let us have recourse to the
descendants of Judah. Though they lie under the general reproach of
nations, as a people dead to virtue and benevolence, and wholly devoted
to avarice, fraud, and extortion, the most savage of their tribe cannot
treat me with more barbarity of indifference, than I have experienced
among those who are the authors of their reproach.”

Although Fathom looked upon this proposal as an extravagant symptom of
despair, he affected to approve of the scheme, and encouraged Renaldo
with the hope of succeeding in another quarter, even if this expedition
should fail; for, by this time, our adventurer was half resolved to
export him at his own charge, rather than he should be much longer
restricted in his designs upon Monimia.

Meanwhile, being resolved to try the experiment upon the children of
Israel, they betook themselves to the house of a rich Jew, whose wealth
they considered as a proof of his rapaciousness; and, being admitted
into his counting-house, they found him in the midst of half a dozen
clerks, when Renaldo, in his imagination, likened him unto a minister
of darkness surrounded by his familiars, and planning schemes of misery
to be executed upon the hapless sons of men. In spite of these
suggestions, which were not at all mitigated by the forbidding aspect
of the Hebrew, he demanded a private audience; and, being ushered into
another apartment, he explained his business with manifest marks of
disorder and affliction. Indeed, his confusion was in some measure
owing to the looks of the Jew, who, in the midst of this exordium,
pulled down his eyebrows, which were surprisingly black and bushy, so
as, in appearance, totally to extinguish his visage, though he was all
the time observing our youth from behind those almost impenetrable
thickets.

Melvil, having signified his request, “Young gentleman,” said the
Israelite, with a most discordant voice, “what in the name of goodness
could induce you to come to me upon such an errand? Did you ever hear
that I lent money to strangers without security?” “No,” replied
Renaldo, “nor did I believe I should profit by my application; but my
affairs are desperate; and my proposals having been rejected by every
Christian to whom they were offered, I was resolved to try my fate
among the Jews, who are reckoned another species of men.”

Fathom, alarmed at this abrupt reply, which he supposed could not fail
to disgust the merchant, interposed in the conversation, by making an
apology for the plain dealing of his friend, who, he said, was soured
and ruffled by his misfortunes; then exerting that power of eloquence
which he had at command, he expostulated upon Renaldo’s claim and
expectations, described the wrongs he had suffered, extolled his
virtue, and drew a most pathetic picture of his distress.

The Jew listened attentively for some time; then his eyebrows began to
rise and fall alternately; he coughed, sneezed, and winking hard, “I’m
plagued,” said he, “with a salt rheum that trickles from my eyes
without intermission.” So saying, he wiped the moisture from his face,
and proceeded in these words: “Sir, your story is plausible; and your
friend is a good advocate; but before I give an answer to your demand,
I must beg leave to ask if you can produce undeniable evidence of your
being the identical person you really assume? If you are really the
Count de Melvil, you will excuse my caution. We cannot be too much on
our guard against fraud; though I must own you have not the air of an
impostor.”

Renaldo’s eyes began to sparkle at this preliminary question; to which
he replied, that he could procure the testimony of the Emperor’s
minister, to whom he had occasionally paid his respects since his first
arrival in England.

“If that be the case,” said the Jew, “take the trouble to call here
to-morrow morning, at eight o’clock, and I will carry you in my own
coach to the house of his excellency, with whom I have the honour to be
acquainted; and, if he has nothing to object against your character or
pretensions, I will contribute my assistance towards your obtaining
justice at the Imperial court.”

The Hungarian was so much confounded at this unexpected reception, that
he had not power to thank the merchant for his promised favour, but
stood motionless and silent, while the streams of emotion of the heart
was of more weight with the Jew, than the eloquent acknowledgment which
Ferdinand took the opportunity of making for his friend; and he was
fain to dismiss them a little abruptly, in order to prevent a second
discharge of that same rheum of which he had already complained.

Melvil recollected all that had happened as a dream, which had no
foundation in truth, and was all day long in a sort of delirium,
produced by the alternate gusts of hope and fear that still agitated
his bosom; for he was not yet without apprehension of being again
disappointed by some unlucky occurrence.

He did not, however, fail to be punctual to the hour of his
appointment, when the Jew told him, there would be no occasion for
visiting the ambassador, because Renaldo had been, the preceding day,
recognised by one of the clerks who had been employed as a purveyor in
the Imperial army; and who, knowing his family, confirmed everything he
had alleged. “After breakfast,” continued this benevolent Israelite, “I
will give you an order upon my banker for five hundred pounds, that you
may be enabled to appear at Vienna as the son and representative of
Count Melvil; and you shall also be furnished with a letter of
recommendation to a person of some influence at that court, whose
friendship and countenance may be of some service to your suit; for I
am now heartily engaged in your interest, in consequence of the fair
and unblemished character which I find you have hitherto maintained.”

The reader must appeal to his own heart, to acquire a just idea of
Renaldo’s feelings, when every tittle of these promises was fulfilled,
and the merchant refused to take one farthing by way of premium,
contenting himself with the slender security of a personal bond. He
was, in truth, overwhelmed with the obligation, and certainly disposed
to believe that his benefactor was something more than human. As for
Fathom, his sentiments took a different turn; and he scrupled not to
impute all this kindness to some deep-laid interested scheme, the scope
of which he could not at present comprehend.

After the tumults of the young gentleman’s joy had subsided, and he
found himself eased of that burdensome poverty under which he had
groaned so long, his thoughts, which before were dissipated upon the
various circumstances of distress, began to collect themselves in a
body, and to resume their deliberations upon a subject which they had
been long accustomed to consider; this was no other than the forlorn
Monimia, whose idea now emerged in his bosom, being disencumbered of
one part of the load by which it had been depressed. He mentioned her
name to Fathom with marks of the most melting compassion, deplored her
apostasy, and, while he protested that he had divorced her for ever
from his heart, expressed an inclination to see her once more before
his departure, that he might in person exhort her to penitence and
reformation.

Our adventurer, who dreaded such an interview as the infallible means
of his own ruin, resisted the proposal with the whole power of his
elocution. He affirmed, that Renaldo’s desire was a manifest proof that
he still retained part of the fatal poison which that enchantress had
spread within his veins; and that the sight of her, softened by his
reproaches into tears and affected contrition, would dispel his
resentment, disable his manhood, and blow the embers of his former
passion to such a rage, as would hurry him on to a reconciliation,
which would debase his honour, and ruin his future peace. In a word,
Ferdinand described the danger that would attend the meeting in such
emphatic terms, that the Hungarian started with horror at the picture
which he drew, and in this particular conformed with the admonition of
his friend.

One hundred pounds of the Jew’s money was immediately appropriated for
the payment of his most urgent debts; the like sum he presented to his
friend Fathom, with a solemn promise of sharing with him whatever good
fortune might await him in Germany. And though Monimia had forfeited
all title to his regard, so ill could he bear the prospect of her
distress, that he entrusted his dear companion with the half of what
remained, to be expended for her use, fully resolving to screen her
from the shocks and temptations of want, as the circumstances of his
future fate would allow.

Fathom, far from opposing, applauded his generosity with marks of
extreme wonder and admiration, assuring him, that she should be put in
possession of his bounty immediately after his departure, he being
unwilling to make her acquainted with her good fortune before that
period, lest, finding his affairs in a fair way of being retrieved, she
should be base enough to worship his returning prosperity, and, by
false professions, and artful blandishments, seek to ensnare his heart
anew.




CHAPTER FORTY-EIGHT

COUNT FATHOM UNMASKS HIS BATTERY; IS REPULSED; AND VARIES HIS
OPERATIONS WITHOUT EFFECT.


Every necessary preparation being made, Renaldo, accompanied by our
adventurer, took the road to Dover, where he embarked in a packet-boat
for Calais, after having settled a correspondence with his dear
Ferdinand, from whom he did not part without tears. He had before
solicited him to be his fellow-traveller, that he might personally
enjoy the benefit of his conversation and superior sagacity; but these
entreaties he strenuously opposed, on pretence of his being determined
to push his fortune in England, which he considered as his native
country, and as the land in which, of all others, a man of merit has
the best encouragement. Such were the reasons he alleged for refusing
to attend his benefactor, who was himself eagerly desirous of attaining
a settlement in the island of Great Britain. But our hero’s real
motives for staying were of a very different complexion.—The reader is
already informed of his aim upon the fair orphan, which, at present,
was the chief spring of his conduct. He may also recollect such
passages of his life, as were sufficient to deter him from reappearing
at Presburg or Vienna. But, besides these reflections, he was detained
by a full persuasion that Renaldo would sink under the power and
influence of his antagonist, consequently be rendered incapable to
provide for his friends; and that he himself, fraught with wiles and
experience as he was, could not fail to make himself amends for what he
had suffered among a people equally rich and unthinking.

Melvil, having embraced our adventurer, and with a deep sigh bid him
take care of the unfortunate Monimia, committed himself to the sea,
and, by the assistance of a favourable gale, was in four hours safely
landed on the French shore; while Fathom took post-horses for London,
where he arrived that same night, and next day, in the forenoon, went
to visit the beauteous mourner, who had as yet received no intimation
of Renaldo’s departure or design. He found her in the attitude of
writing a letter to her inconstant lover, the contents of which the
reader will be acquainted with in due time. Her countenance,
notwithstanding the veil of melancholy by which it was overcast, seemed
altogether serene and composed; she was the picture of pious
resignation, and sat like PATIENCE on a monument, smiling at grief.
After having paid the compliment of the morning, Fathom begged pardon
for having omitted to visit her during three days, in which, he said,
his time had been wholly engrossed in procuring a proper equipage for
Count Melvil, who had at last bid an eternal adieu to the island of
Great Britain.

At this information the hapless Monimia fell back in her chair, and
continued some minutes in a swoon; from which being recovered, “Excuse
me, Mr. Fathom,” cried she with a deep sigh; “this, I hope, is the last
agony I shall feel from my unhappy passion.”—Then wiping the tears from
her lovely eyes, she retrieved her tranquillity, and desired to know by
what means Renaldo had been enabled to undertake his journey into the
empire. Our hero, upon this occasion, assumed the whole merit of having
promoted the interest of his friend, by giving her to understand, that
he, in consequence of an unforeseen windfall, had defrayed the expense
of the Count’s equipment; though he observed, that it was not without
reluctance he saw Renaldo make a wrong use of his friendship.

“Although I was happy,” proceeded this artful traitor, “in being able
to discharge my obligations to the house of Melvil, I could not help
feeling the most sensible chagrin, when I saw my assistance rendered
subservient to the triumphs of the youth’s baseness and infidelity; for
he chose, as the companion of his travels, the abandoned woman for whom
he had forsaken the all-perfect Monimia, whose virtue and
accomplishments did not preserve her sacred from his ungrateful
sarcasms and unmannerly ridicule. Believe me, madam, I was so shocked
at his conversation on that subject, and so much incensed at his want
of delicacy, that my temper was scarce sufficient for the ceremony of
parting. And, now that my debt to his family is over-paid, I have
solemnly renounced his correspondence.”

When she heard that, instead of betraying the least symptom of regret
or compassion for her unhappy fate, the perfidious youth had exulted
over her fall, and even made her a subject for his mirth, the blood
revisited her faded cheeks, and resentment restored to her eyes that
poignancy which sorrow had before overcome. Yet she scorned to give
speech to her indignation; but, forcing a smile, “Why should I repine,”
said she, “at the mortifications of a life which I despise, and from
which, I hope, Heaven speedily will set me free!”

Fathom, fired by her emotion, which had recalled all the graces of her
beauty, exclaimed in a rapture, “Talk not so contemptuously of this
life, which hath still a fund of happiness in store for the amiable,
the divine Monimia. Though one admirer hath proved an apostate to his
vows, your candour will not suffer you to condemn the whole sex. Some
there are, whose bosoms glow with passion equally pure, unalterable,
and intense. For my own part, I have sacrificed to a rigid punctilio of
honour the dearest ideas of my heart. I beheld your unrivalled charms,
and deeply felt their power. Yet, while a possibility of Melvil’s
reformation remained, and while I was restrained by my niggard fortune
from making a tender worthy of your acceptance, I combated with my
inclinations, and bore without repining the pangs of hopeless love.
But, now that my honour is disengaged, and my fortune rendered
independent, by the last will of a worthy nobleman, whose friendship I
was favoured with in France, I presume to lay myself at the feet of the
adorable Monimia, as the most faithful of admirers, whose happiness or
misery wholly depends upon her nod. Believe me, madam, these are not
the professions of idle gallantry—I speak the genuine, though
imperfect, language of my heart. Words, even the most pathetic, cannot
do justice to my love. I gaze upon your beauty with ravishment; but I
contemplate the graces of your soul with such awful veneration, that I
tremble while I approach you, as if my vows were addressed to some
superior being.”

During this declaration, which was pronounced in the most emphatic
manner, Monimia was successively agitated with shame, anger, and grief;
nevertheless, she summoned her whole philosophy to her aid, and, with a
tranquil, though determined air, begged he would not diminish the
obligations he had already conferred, by disturbing with such
unseasonable addresses a poor unhappy maid, who had detached all her
thoughts from earthly objects, and waited impatiently for that
dissolution which alone could put a period to her misfortunes.

Fathom, imagining that these were no other than the suggestions of a
temporary disappointment and despondence, which it was his business to
oppose with all his eloquence and art, renewed his theme with redoubled
ardour, and, at last, became so importunate in his desires, that
Monimia, provoked beyond the power of concealing her resentment, said,
she was heartily sorry to find herself under the necessity of telling
him, that, in the midst of her misfortunes, she could not help
remembering what she had been. Then, rising from her seat, with all the
dignity of displeasure, “Perhaps,” added she, “you have forgot who was
the father of the once happy Monimia.”

With these words she retired into another chamber, leaving our
adventurer confounded by the repulse he had sustained. Not that he was
discouraged from prosecuting his aim—on the contrary, this rebuff
seemed to add fresh vigour to his operations. He now thought it high
time to bring over Madam la Mer to his interest; and, to facilitate her
conversion, took an opportunity of bribing her with some inconsiderable
presents, after having amused her with a plausible tale of his passion
for Monimia, with whom she undertook the office of his mediatrix, on
the supposition that his intentions were honourable, and highly
advantageous to her lodger.

She was, first of all, invested with the office of obtaining pardon for
the offence he had given; and, in this negotiation she succeeded so
well, as to become an advocate for his suit; accordingly, she took all
occasions of magnifying his praise. His agreeable person was often the
subject of her discourse to the fair mourner. Her admiration dwelt upon
his politeness, good sense, and winning deportment; and she every day
retailed little stories of his benevolence and greatness of soul. The
defect in his birth she represented as a circumstance altogether
foreign from the consideration of his merit; especially in a nation
where such distinctions are as little respected as they will be in a
future state. She mentioned several persons of note, who basked in the
sunshine of power and fortune, without having enjoyed the least
hereditary assistance from their forefathers. One, she said, sprung
from the loins of an obscure attorney; another was the grandson of a
valet-de-chambre; a third was the issue of an accountant; and a fourth
the offspring of a woollen draper. All these were the children of their
own good works, and had raised themselves upon their personal virtues
and address; a foundation certainly more solid and honourable than a
vague inheritance derived from ancestors, in whose deserts they could
not be supposed to have borne the least share.

Monimia listened to all these arguments with great patience and
affability, though she at once dived into the source from which all
such insinuations flowed. She joined in the commendations of Fathom,
and owned herself a particular instance of that benevolence which the
old lady had so justly extolled; but, once for all, to prevent the
supplication which Madam la Mer was about to make, she solemnly
protested that her heart was altogether shut against any other earthly
engagement, and that her thoughts were altogether employed upon her
eternal salvation.

The assiduous landlady, perceiving the steadiness of her disposition,
thought proper to alter her method of proceeding, and, for the present,
suspended that theme by which she found her fair lodger disobliged.
Resolved to reconcile Monimia to life, before she would again recommend
Ferdinand to her love, she endeavoured to amuse her imagination, by
recounting the occasional incidents of the day, hoping gradually to
decoy her attention to those sublunary objects from which it had been
industriously weaned. She seasoned her conversation with agreeable
sallies; enlarged upon the different scenes of pleasure and diversion
appertaining to this great metropolis; practised upon her palate with
the delicacies of eating; endeavoured to shake her temperance with
repeated proffers and recommendations of certain cordials and
restoratives, which she alleged were necessary for the recovery of her
health; and pressed her to make little excursions into the fields that
skirt the town, for the benefit of air and exercise.

While this auxiliary plied the disconsolate Monimia on one hand, Fathom
was not remiss on the other. He now seemed to have sacrificed his
passion to her quiet; his discourse turned upon more indifferent
subjects. He endeavoured to dispel her melancholy with arguments drawn
from philosophy and religion. On some occasions, he displayed all his
fund of good humour, with a view to beguile her sorrow; he importuned
her to give him the pleasure of squiring her to some place of innocent
entertainment; and, finally, insisted upon her accepting a pecuniary
reinforcement to her finances, which he knew to be in a most
consumptive condition.




CHAPTER FORTY-NINE

MONIMIA’S HONOUR IS PROTECTED BY THE INTERPOSITION OF HEAVEN.


With that complacency and fortitude which were peculiar to herself,
this hapless stranger resisted all those artful temptations. Her
sustenance was barely such as exempted her from the guilt of being
accessory to her own death; her drink was the simple element. She
encouraged no discourse but that which turned upon the concerns of her
immortal part. She never went abroad, except in visits to a French
chapel in the neighbourhood; she refused the proffered assistance of
our adventurer with equal obstinacy and politeness, and with pleasure
saw herself wasting towards that period of mortality which was the
consummation of her wish. Yet her charms, far from melting away with
her constitution, seemed to triumph over the decays of nature. Her
shape and features still retained that harmony for which they had
always been distinguished. A mixture of majesty and sweetness diffused
itself in her looks, and her feebleness added to that soft and feminine
grace which attracts the sympathy, and engages the protection of every
humane beholder. The associates thus baffled in their attempts to
excite her ideas of pleasure, again shifted their plan, and resolved to
attack this forlorn beauty on the side of fear and mortification.

Our adventurer became less frequent in his visits, and more indifferent
in his language and deportment; while Madam la Mer gradually relaxed in
that complacency and respect with which she had hitherto behaved
towards her fair lodger. She even began to drop hints of disapprobation
and reproach against this pattern of innocence and beauty, and at
length grew bold enough to tell her, that her misfortunes could be
attributed to nothing but her own obstinacy and pride; that she had
been at great pains to disoblige the only person who was able and
willing to raise her above dependence; and that, if his protection
should be withdrawn, she must be exposed to the utmost extremity of
distress.

These insinuations, instead of producing the desired effect, inflamed
the indignation of Monimia, who, in a most dignified style of rebuke,
chid her for her indelicacy and presumption, observing, that she could
have no title to take such freedoms with lodgers, whose punctuality and
regular deportment left her no room to complain. Notwithstanding this
animated reply, she underwent the most deplorable anguish, when she
reflected upon the insolence of this woman, from whose barbarity she
had no resource; and, seeing no other possibility of redress than that
of appealing to the good offices of Fathom, she conquered her
reluctance so far, as to complain to him of Madam la Mer’s incivility.

Pleased with this application, he gave her to understand, with very
little ceremony or preamble, that it wholly depended upon herself
whether she should continue to be wretched, or be delivered at once
from all her cares and perplexity; that, notwithstanding the disdain
with which she had treated his addresses, he was still ready to lay
himself and his fortune at her feet; and that, if she should again
reject the disinterested proposal, the whole world and her own
conscience would charge upon herself whatever calamities she might be
subjected to in the sequel. Interpreting into a favourable hesitation
her silence, which was the result of wrath and amazement, he proceeded
to throw himself at her feet, and utter a romantic rhapsody, in the
course of which, laying aside all that restraint which he had hitherto
preserved, he seized her delicate hand, and pressed it to his lips;
nay, so far did he forget himself on this occasion, that he caught the
fair creature in his arms, and rudely ravished a kiss from those lips
which he had before contemplated with the most distant reverence of
desire.

Having thus broken down the fences of decorum, and being heated with
transport, he, in all probability, would have acted the part of young
Tarquin, and violated by force that sacred shrine of honour, beauty,
and unblemished truth, had not the wrath kindled by such an unexpected
outrage inspired her with strength and spirits sufficient to protect
her virtue, and intimidate the ruffian who could offer violence to such
perfection. She broke from his detested embrace with surprising
agility, and called aloud to her landlady for assistance; but that
discreet matron was resolved to hear nothing, and Fathom’s appetite
being whetted to a most brutal degree of eagerness, “Madam,” said he,
“all opposition is vain. What you have refused to my entreaties, you
shall yield to my power; and I am determined to force you to your own
advantage.”

So saying, he sprung towards her, with the most savage and impious
intent, when this amiable heroine snatching up his sword, which lay
upon a by-table, and unsheathing it instantaneously, presented the
point to his breast, and, while her eyes glanced with intolerable
keenness, “Villain!” cried she, “the spirit of my father animates my
bosom, and the vengeance of Heaven shall not be frustrated.” He was not
so much affected by his bodily danger, as awestruck at the manner of
her address, and the appearance of her aspect, which seemed to shine
with something supernatural, and actually disordered his whole
faculties, insomuch that he retreated without attempting to make the
least reply; and she, having secured the door after his departure, sat
down to ponder upon this shocking event.

Words are wanting to describe the accumulated horrors that took
possession of her mind, when she thus beheld all her presaging fears
realised, and found herself at the mercy of two wretches, who had now
pulled off the mask, after having lost all sentiments of humanity.
Common affliction was an agreeable reverie to what she suffered,
deprived of her parents, exiled from her friends and country, reduced
to the brink of wanting the most indispensable necessaries of life, in
a foreign land, where she knew not one person to whose protection she
could have recourse, from the inexpressible woes that environed her.
She complained to Heaven that her life was protracted, for the
augmentation of that misery which was already too severe to be endured;
for she shuddered at the prospect of being utterly abandoned in the
last stage of mortality, without one friend to close her eyes, or do
the last offices of humanity to her breathless corse. These were
dreadful reflections to a young lady who had been born to affluence and
splendour, trained up in all the elegance of education, by nature
fraught with that sensibility which refines the sentiment and taste,
and so tenderly cherished by her indulgent parents, that they suffered
not the winds of Heaven to visit her face too roughly.

Having passed the night in such agony, she rose at daybreak, and,
hearing the chapel bell toll for morning prayers, resolved to go to
this place of worship, in order to implore the assistance of Heaven.
She no sooner opened her chamber door, with this intent, than she was
met by Madam la Mer, who, after having professed her concern for what
had happened overnight, and imputed Mr. Fathom’s rudeness to the spirit
of intoxication, by which she had never before seen him possessed, she
endeavoured to dissuade Monimia from her purpose, by observing, that
her health would be prejudiced by the cold morning air; but finding her
determined, she insisted upon accompanying her to chapel, on pretence
of respect, though, in reality, with a view to prevent the escape of
her beauteous lodger. Thus attended, the hapless mourner entered the
place, and, according to the laudable hospitality of England, which is
the only country in Christendom where a stranger is not made welcome to
the house of God, this amiable creature, emaciated and enfeebled as she
was, must have stood in a common passage during the whole service, had
not she been perceived by a humane gentlewoman, who, struck with her
beauty and dignified air, and melted with sympathy at the ineffable
sorrow which was visible in her countenance, opened the pew in which
she sat, and accommodated Monimia and her attendant. If she was
captivated by her first appearance, she was not less affected by the
deportment of her fair guest, which was the pattern of genuine
devotion.

In a word, this good lady, who was a merchant’s widow in opulent
circumstances, was inflamed with a longing desire to know and befriend
the amiable stranger, who, after service, turning about to thank her
for her civility, Madam Clement, with that frankness which is the
result of true benevolence, told her, she was too much prepossessed in
her favour to let slip this opportunity of craving her acquaintance,
and of expressing her inclination to alleviate, if possible, that
affliction which was manifest in her looks.

Monimia, overwhelmed with gratitude and surprise at this unexpected
address, gazed upon the lady in silence, and when she repeated her
tenders of service, could make no other reply to her goodness, than by
bursting into a flood of tears. This was a species of eloquence which
did not pass unregarded by Madam Clement, who, while her own eyes were
bedewed with the drops of sympathy and compassion, took the lovely
orphan by the hand, and led her, without further ceremony, to her own
coach, that stood waiting at the door, whither they were followed by
Mrs. la Mer, who was so much confounded at the adventure, that she made
no objections to the proposal of the lady, who handed her lodger into
the carriage; but retired, with all possible despatch, to make Fathom
acquainted with this unforeseen event.

Meanwhile the agitation of Monimia, at this providential deliverance,
was such as had well-nigh destroyed her tender frame. The blood flushed
and forsook her cheeks by turns; she trembled from head to foot,
notwithstanding the consolatory assurances of Madam Clement, and,
without being able to utter one word, was conducted to the house of
that kind benefactress, where the violence of her transports
overpowered her constitution, and she sunk down upon a couch in a
swoon, from which she was not easily recovered. This affecting
circumstance augmented the pity, and interested the curiosity of Madam
Clement, who concluded there was something very extraordinary in the
case of the stranger, to produce these agonies; and grew impatient to
hear the particulars of her story.

Monimia no sooner retrieved the use of her faculties, than looking
around, and observing with what humane concern her new hostess was
employed in effecting her recovery, “Is this,” said she, “a flattering
illusion of the brain? or am I really under the protection of some
beneficent being, whom Heaven hath inspired with generosity to rescue
an hapless stranger from the most forlorn state of misery and woe?” Her
voice was at all times ravishingly sweet; and this exclamation was
pronounced with such pathetic fervour, that Madam Clement clasped her
in her arms, and kissing her with all the eagerness of maternal
affection, “Yes,” cried she, “fair creature, Heaven hath bestowed upon
me an heart to compassionate, and power, I hope, to lighten the burden
of your sorrows.”

She then prevailed upon her to take some nourishment, and afterwards to
recount the particulars of her fate; a task she performed with such
accuracy and candour, that Madam Clement, far from suspecting her
sincerity, saw truth and conviction in every circumstance of her tale;
and, having condoled her misfortunes, entreated her to forget them, or
at least look upon herself as one sheltered under the care and tuition
of a person whose study it would be to supply her want of natural
parents. This would have been an happy vicissitude of fortune, had it
not arrived too late; but such a sudden and unlooked-for transition not
only disordered the faculties of poor Monimia’s mind, but also
overpowered the organs of her body, already fatigued and enfeebled by
the distresses she had undergone; so that she was taken ill of a fever
that same night, and became delirious before morning, when a physician
was called to her assistance.

While this gentleman was in the house, Madam Clement was visited by
Fathom, who, after having complained, in the most insinuating manner
that she had encouraged his wife to abandon her duty, told her a
plausible story of his first acquaintance with Monimia, and his
marriage at the Fleet, which, he said, he was ready to prove by the
evidence of the clergyman who joined them, and that of Mrs. la Mer, who
was present at the ceremony. The good lady, although a little staggered
at the genteel appearance and engaging address of this stranger, could
not prevail upon herself to believe that she had been imposed upon by
her fair lodger, who by this time had given too convincing a proof of
her sincerity; nevertheless, in order to prevent any dispute that might
be prejudicial to the health or recovery of Monimia, she gave him to
understand, that she would not at present enter upon the merits of the
cause, but only assure him, that the young lady was actually bereft of
her senses, and in imminent danger of her life; for the truth of which
assertions she would appeal to his own observation, and the opinion of
the physician, who was then employed in writing a prescription for the
cure of her disease.

So saying, she conducted him into the chamber, where he beheld the
hapless virgin stretched upon a sick-bed, panting under the violence of
a distemper too mighty for her weakly frame, her hair dishevelled, and
discomposure in her looks; all the roses of her youth were faded, yet
all the graces of her beauty were not fled. She retained that sweetness
and symmetry, which death itself could not destroy; and though her
discourse was incoherent, her voice was still musical, resembling those
feathered songsters who warble their native wood-notes wild.

Fathom, as upon all other occasions, so on this, did behave like an
inimitable actor; he ran to the bedside, with all the trepidation of a
distracted lover; he fell upon his knees, and, while the tears rolled
down his cheeks, imprinted a thousand kisses on the soft hand of
Monimia, who regarding him with a lack-lustre and undistinguishing eye,
“Alas! Renaldo,” said she, “we were born to be unhappy.” “Would to
Heaven,” cried Ferdinand, in a transport of grief, “the wretch Renaldo
had never been born! that is the villain who seduced the affection of
this unfortunate woman. I admitted the traitor into my friendship and
confidence, relieved him in his necessities; and, like the ungrateful
viper, he hath stung the very bosom that cherished him in his
distress.” Then he proceeded to inform Madam Clement how he had
delivered that same Renaldo from prison, maintained him afterwards at a
great expense, and at length furnished him with a sum of money and
proper credentials to support his interest at the Court of Vienna.

Having finished this detail, he asked the physician’s sentiments of his
wife’s distemper, and being told that her life was in extreme jeopardy,
begged he would use his utmost endeavours in her behalf, and even made
him a tender of an extraordinary fee, which was refused. He also
thanked Madam Clement for her charity and benevolence towards a
stranger, and took his leave with many polite professions of gratitude
and esteem. He had no sooner quitted the house, than the physician, who
was a humane man, and a foreigner, began to caution the lady against
his insinuations, observing, that some circumstances of the story
concerning Renaldo were, to his particular knowledge, contrary to
truth; for that he himself had been applied to for letters of
recommendation in behalf of Count Melvil, by a Jew merchant of his
acquaintance, who had supplied the young gentleman with money
sufficient for his occasions, in consequence of a minute inquiry he had
made into the character of Renaldo, who was, by all reports, a youth of
strict honour and untainted morals.

Madam Clement, thus cautioned, entered into deliberation with her own
thoughts, and, comparing the particulars of this account with those of
Monimia’s own story, she concluded that Fathom was the very traitor he
himself had described; and that he had, by abusing the confidence of
both, effected a fatal breach between two innocent and deserving
lovers. She accordingly looked upon him with horror and detestation;
but nevertheless resolved to treat him with civility in the meantime,
that the poor young lady might not be disturbed in her last moments;
for she had now lost all hopes of her recovery. Yet the fever abated,
and in two days she retrieved the use of her reason; though the
distemper had affected her lungs, and she was in all appearance doomed
to linger a few weeks longer in a consumption.

Fathom was punctual in his visitation, though never admitted into her
presence after the delirium vanished; and he had the opportunity of
seeing her conveyed in a chariot to Kensington Gravel Pits, a place
which may be termed the last stage of many a mortal peregrination. He
now implicitly believed that death would in a few days baffle all his
designs upon the unfortunate Monimia; and foreseeing that, as he had
owned himself her husband, he might be obliged to defray the expenses
incurred by her sickness and burial, he very prudently intermitted in
his visits, and had recourse to the intelligence of his auxiliary.

As for Monimia, she approached the goal of life, not simply with
resignation, but with rapture. She enjoyed in tranquillity the
conversation of her kind benefactress, who never stirred from her
apartment; she was blessed with the spiritual consolation of a worthy
clergyman, who removed all her religious scruples; and she
congratulated herself on the near prospect of that land of peace where
sorrow is not known.

At length Mrs. la Mer gave notice to our adventurer of this amiable
young lady’s decease, and the time fixed for the interment. Upon which
these two virtuous associates took possession of a place from whence
they could, unperceived, behold the funeral. He must have a hard heart,
who, without an emotion of pity, can see the last offices performed to
a young creature cut off in the flower of youth and beauty, even though
he knows not her name, and is an utter stranger to her virtues. How
callous then must the soul of that wretch have been, who, without a
symptom of remorse or concern, saw the sable hearse adorned with white
plumes, as emblems of Monimia’s purity, pass before him, while her
incomparable merit stood full in his remembrance, and he knew himself
the wicked cause of her untimely fate!

Perfidious wretch! thy crimes turn out so atrocious, that I half repent
me of having undertaken to record thy memoirs; yet such monsters ought
to be exhibited to public view, that mankind may be upon their guard
against imposture; that the world may see how fraud is apt to overshoot
itself; and that, as virtue, though it may suffer for a while, will
triumph in the end; so iniquity, though it may prosper for a season,
will at last be overtaken by that punishment and disgrace which are its
due.




CHAPTER FIFTY

FATHOM SHIFTS THE SCENE, AND APPEARS IN A NEW CHARACTER.


Fathom’s expectations with respect to the fair orphan having thus
proved abortive, he lost no time in bewailing his miscarriage, but had
immediate recourse to other means of improving his small fortune,
which, at this period, amounted to near two hundred pounds. Whatever
inclination he had to resume the character he had formerly borne in the
polite world, he durst not venture to launch out again into the expense
necessary to maintain that station, because his former resources were
now stopped, and all the people of fashion by this time convinced of
his being a needy adventurer. Nevertheless, he resolved to sound the
sentiments of his old friends at a distance, and judge, from the
reception he should meet with, how far he might presume upon their
countenance and favour. For he rightly supposed, that if he could in
any shape contribute to their interest or amusement, they would easily
forgive his former pretensions to quality, arrogant as they were, and
still entertain him on the footing of a necessary acquaintance.

With this view, he one day presented himself at court in a very gay
suit of clothes, and bowed, at a distance, to many of his old
fashionable friends of both sexes, not one of whom favoured him with
any other notice, than that of a quarter curtsey, or slight inclination
of the head. For, by this time, the few that remembered him knew from
what retirement he now emerged, and avoided him accordingly as the jail
infection. But the greater part of those who had cultivated him in the
zenith of his fortune were now utter strangers to his person, which
they had actually forgot, amidst the succession of novelties that
surrounded them; or, if they did recollect his name, it was remembered
as an old fashion which had been many months out of date.

Notwithstanding these mortifying discouragements, our hero, that same
evening, effected a lodgment in a certain gaming-house not far from St.
James’s; and, as he played pretty high, and made a parade of his ready
money, he was soon recognised by divers persons of consequence, who
cordially welcomed him to England, on pretence of believing he had been
abroad, and with great complacency repeated their former professions of
friendship. Though this was a certain way of retaining the favour of
those worthies, while his finances continued to flourish, and his
payments were prompt, he knew the weakness of his funds too well, to
think they could bear the vicissitudes of play; and the remembrance of
the two British knights who had spoiled him at Paris, hung over his
imagination with the most frightful presages. Besides, he perceived
that gaming was now managed in such a manner, as rendered skill and
dexterity of no advantage. For the spirit of play having overspread the
land, like a pestilence, raged to such a degree of madness and
desperation, that the unhappy people who were infected, laid aside all
thoughts of amusement, economy, or caution, and risked their fortunes
upon issues equally extravagant, childish, and absurd.

The whole mystery of the art was reduced to the simple exercise of
tossing up a guinea, and the lust of laying wagers, which they indulged
to a surprising pitch of ridiculous intemperance. In one corner of the
room might be heard a pair of lordlings running their grandmothers
against each other, that is, betting sums on the longest liver; in
another the success of the wager depended upon the sex of the
landlady’s next child; and one of the waiters happening to drop down in
an apoplectic fit, a certain noble peer exclaimed, “Dead for a thousand
pounds.” The challenge was immediately accepted; and when the master of
the house sent for a surgeon to attempt the cure, the nobleman, who set
the price upon the patient’s head, insisted upon his being left to the
efforts of nature alone, otherwise the wager should be void. Nay, when
the landlord harped upon the loss he should sustain by the death of a
trusty servant, his lordship obviated the objection, by desiring that
the fellow might be charged in the bill.

In short, the rage of gaming seemed to have devoured all their other
faculties, and to have equalled the rash enthusiasm of the inhabitants
of Malacca in the East Indies, who are so possessed with that
pernicious spirit, that they sacrifice to it not only their fortunes,
but also their wives and children; and then letting their hair down
upon their shoulders, in imitation of the ancient Lacedaemonians when
they devoted themselves to death, those wretches unsheathe their
daggers, and murder every living creature in their way. In this,
however, they differ from the gamesters of our country, who never find
their senses, until they have lost their fortunes, and beggared their
families; whereas the Malays never run amuck, but in consequence of
misery and despair.

Such are the amusements, or rather such is the continual employment of
those hopeful youths who are destined by birth to be the judges of our
property, and pillars of our constitution. Such are the heirs and
representatives of those patriots who planned, and those heroes who
maintained, the laws and freedom of their country; who were the patrons
of merit, the fathers of the poor, the terror of vice and immorality,
and at once the ornaments and support of a happy nation.

Our adventurer considered all these circumstances with his wonted
sagacity, and, seeing upon what precarious footing he must stand,
should he rank himself with such society, he wisely came to the
resolution of descending one step in the degrees of life, and of taking
upon him the title of physician, under which he did not despair of
insinuating himself into the pockets of his patients, and into the
secrets of private families, so as to acquire a comfortable share of
practice, or captivate the heart of some heiress or rich widow, whose
fortune would at once render him independent and happy.

After this determination, his next care was to concert measures for his
first appearance in this new character; well knowing, that the success
of a physician, in a great measure, depends upon the external equipage
in which he first declares himself an adept in the healing art. He
first of all procured a few books on the subject of medicine, which he
studied with great attention during the remaining part of the winter
and spring, and repaired to Tunbridge with the first of the season,
where he appeared in the uniform of Aesculapius, namely, a plain suit,
full trimmed, with a voluminous tie-periwig; believing that in this
place he might glide, as it were, imperceptibly into the functions of
his new employment, and gradually accustom himself to the method and
form of prescription.

A man so well known in the gay world could not be supposed to effect
such a transformation without being observed; and therefore, in order
to anticipate the censure and ridicule of those who might be tempted to
make themselves merry at his expense, he, on his arrival at the wells,
repaired to the shop of an apothecary, and calling for pen, ink, and
paper, wrote a prescription, which he desired might be immediately made
up. While this was doing by the servant, he was invited into a parlour
by the master, with whom he entered into conversation touching the
properties of the Tunbridge water, which seemed to have been his
particular study; and indeed he had perused Rouzee’s treatise on that
subject with indefatigable assiduity. From this theme, he made
digressions into other parts of medicine, upon which he spoke with such
plausible elocution, that the apothecary, whose knowledge in that art
was not very profound, looked upon him as a physician of great learning
and experience, and hinted a desire of knowing his name and situation.

Fathom accordingly gave him to understand, that he had studied physic,
and taken his degrees at Padua, rather for his amusement, than with any
view of exercising medicine, as he then could not possibly foresee the
misfortunes which had since happened to his family, and by which he was
now compelled to have recourse to a profession that was very much
beneath the expectations of his birth. Yet he bore his disappointments
with resignation, and even good-humour, and blessed his stars for
having inclined him to the study of any branch of knowledge by which he
might be enabled to laugh at the vicissitudes of fortune. He then
observed, that he had practised with some applause at the hot well near
Bristol, before he thought he should be ever reduced to the necessity
of taking a fee, and that, in all probability, his metamorphosis, when
known, would furnish matter of surprise and merriment to some of his
old acquaintance.

The apothecary was equally struck with his polite address, and pleased
with his agreeable discourse. He consoled him for the misfortunes of
his family, by assuring him, that in England nothing could be more
honourable, or indeed profitable, than the character of a physician,
provided he could once wriggle himself into practice; and insinuated,
that, although he was restricted by certain engagements with other
persons of the faculty, he should be glad of an opportunity to show his
regard for Doctor Fathom. This was a very effectual method which our
hero took to intimate his new character to the public. By the industry
and communicative disposition of the apothecary, it was circulated in
half a day through every family in the place; and, next morning, when
Ferdinand appeared, the company forthwith assembled in separate groups,
and from each knot he heard his name reverberated in a whisper.

Having thus announced himself to all whom it might concern, and allowed
the ladies two days to discuss the merit of his transfiguration,
together with the novelty of the case, he ventured to salute, at a
distance, a lady and her daughter, who had been his patients at the hot
well; and, although they honoured his bow with the return of a slight
curtsey, they gave him not the least encouragement to make a nearer
approach. Notwithstanding this rebuff, he concluded, that, should the
health of either come in question, they would renew their application
to his skill, and what was refused by their pride would be granted by
their apprehension. Here, however, he happened to be mistaken in his
conjecture.

The young lady being seized with a violent headache and palpitation,
her mother desired the apothecary to recommend a physician; and the
person with whom he was contracted being at that time absent, he
proposed Doctor Fathom as a man of great ability and discretion. But
the good lady rejected the proposal with disdain, because she had
formerly known him in the character of a Count—though that very
character was the chief reason that had then induced her to crave his
advice.

Such is the caprice of the world in general, that whatever bears the
face of novelty captivates, or rather bewitches, the imagination, and
confounds the ideas of reason and common sense. If, for example, a
scullion, from the clinking of pewter, shall conceive a taste for the
clinking of rhyme, and make shift to bring together twenty syllables,
so as that the tenth and last shall have the like ending, the
composition is immediately extolled as a miracle; and what appeals to
the admiration is not the wit, the elegance, or poetry of the work, but
the uncultivated talent and humble station of the author. A reader does
not exclaim, “What a delicate sentiment! what a beautiful simile! what
easy and musical versification!”—but cries in rapture, “Heavens! what a
prodigy a poet from the scullery! a muse in livery! or, Apollo with a
trowel!”—The public is astonished into liberality—the scullion eats
from those trenchers he scoured before—the footman is admitted into the
coach behind which he was wont to stand—and the bricklayer, instead of
plastering walls, bedaubs his illustrious partner with the mortar of
his praise. Thus, lifted into a higher sphere, their talents receive
cultivation; they become professed bards, and though their subsequent
works bear evident marks of improvement, they are neglected among the
rest of their brethren, because that novelty, which recommended them in
the beginning, no longer remains.

So it fared with our adventurer in his new occupation. There was
something so extraordinary in a nobleman’s understanding medicine, and
so uncommon in a physician’s prescribing gratis, that the curiosity and
admiration of the company at Bristol were engaged, and they followed
his advice, as the direction of some supernatural intelligence. But,
now that he professed himself one of the faculty, and might be supposed
to have refreshed his memory, and reinforced his knowledge for the
occasion, he was as much overlooked as any other physician unsupported
by interest or cabal; or, at least, the notice he attracted was not at
all to the advantage of his character, because it wholly regarded the
decline of his fortune, which is a never-failing fund of disgrace.

These mortifications did not overcome the patience and perseverance of
Fathom, who foresaw, that the soothing hand of time would cast a veil
of oblivion over those scenes which were remembered to his prejudice;
and that, in the meantime, though he was excluded from the private
parties of the fair sex, in which his main hope of success was placed,
he should be able to insinuate himself into some degree of favour and
practice among the male patients; and some lucky cure, properly
displayed, might be the means of propagating his fame, and banishing
that reserve which at present interfered with his purpose. Accordingly,
it was not long before he found means to break that spell of universal
prejudice that hedged him in. At the ordinary which he frequented, his
polite carriage, facetious remarks, and agreeable stories soon
conciliated the regard of his fellow-guests, among whom he sometimes
rallied his own transformation with singular good-humour and success.
He was even witty upon his want of employment, and used to observe,
that a physician without practice had one comfort to which his brethren
were strangers, namely, that the seldomer he had occasion to prescribe,
the less he had upon his conscience on account of being accessory to
the death of his fellow-creatures.

Nothing so effectually blunts the shafts of ridicule, and defeats the
aims of slander, as this method of anticipation. In spite of the arrows
that were levelled against his reputation from every tea-table at
Tunbridge, he made his party good among almost all the gay young
gentlemen that frequented the place. Far from avoiding his company,
they began to court his conversation, and he was commonly seen in the
walks surrounded with a group of admirers.

Having thus paved the way for a total removal of the invidious
prepossession that obstructed his views, he, one night, while every
person was lulled in the arms of repose, and universal silence
prevailed, tuned his violin, and began to play some masterly airs, in a
tone so uncommonly expressive, and with such ravishing dexterity of
execution, that a certain lady, who lodged in the same house, being
waked by the music, and ignorant of the source from which it flowed,
listened with rapture, as to the harp of an angel, and, wrapping
herself in a loose gown, rose and opened her chamber door, in order to
discover in what apartment the musician resided. She no sooner entered
the passage, than she found her fellow-lodgers already assembled on the
same occasion; and there they remained during the best part of the
night, transported by the harmony which our hero produced.

Doctor Fathom was immediately known to be the author of this
entertainment; and thus retrieved the benefit of that admiration which
he had forfeited by appearing in the shape of a physician. For, as
people had formerly wondered to see a count skilled in medicine, they
were now amazed to find a physician such a master in music.

The good effects of this stratagem were almost instantaneous. His
performance became the topic of discourse among all the fashionable
company. His male friends complimented him from the information of the
other sex; and that lady whom he had regaled, instead of that shyness
and disdain with which she used to receive his salutation, at their
very next meeting in the thoroughfare, returned his bow with marks of
profound respect. Nay, at midnight, she, with the rest, took post in
the same place where they had been stationed before; and, by frequent
tittering, and repeated whispers, gave intimation to Fathom, that they
would be glad of a second serenade. But he was too well acquainted with
the human passions to indulge this their desire. It was his interest to
inflame their impatience, rather than to gratify their expectation; and
therefore he tantalised them for some hours, by tuning his violin, and
playing some flourishes, which, however, produced nothing to fulfil
their wishes.

At the ordinary, he was accosted by a gentleman, a lodger in the same
house, who assured him, that the ladies would take it as a great favour
if he would let them know when he intended to amuse himself again with
his instrument, that they might not, by falling asleep beforehand,
deprive themselves of the pleasure of hearing his music. To this
message he replied, with an air of consequence and reserve, that,
though music was not the art he professed, he should be always
complaisant enough to entertain the ladies to the utmost of his power,
when their commands were signified to him in a manner suited to his
character; but that he would never put himself on the footing of an
itinerate harper, whose music is tolerated through the medium of a
board partition. The gentleman having reported this answer to his
constituents, they empowered him to invite Doctor Fathom to breakfast,
and he was next morning introduced with the usual ceremony, and treated
with uncommon regard by all the females of the house, assembled for his
reception.

Having thus broken the ice of their aversion in one part, so as that
the beams of his personal accomplishments had room to operate, he soon
effected a general thaw in his favour, and found himself growing once
more into request amongst the most amiable part of the creation. His
company was coveted, and his taste consulted in their balls, concerts,
and private assemblies; and he recompensed the regard they paid to him
with an incessant exertion of his agreeable talents, politeness, and
good-humour.




CHAPTER FIFTY-ONE

TRIUMPHS OVER A MEDICAL RIVAL.


Yet, in the midst of all this attention, his medical capacity seemed to
be quite forgot. They respected his good breeding, were charmed with
his voice, and admired the fine touches of his hand upon the violin;
but in cultivating the fiddler, they utterly neglected the physician;
and in vain did he attempt to divide their regard, by taking all
opportunities to turn the conversation into a more interesting channel.
It was to little purpose he endeavoured to arouse the wonder of his
audience with frequent descriptions of portentous maladies and amazing
cures he had seen and performed in the course of his study and practice
abroad; and to no effect did he publicly busy himself in making
experiments on the mineral water, in which he pretended to have made
several new and important discoveries. These efforts did not make a
lasting impression upon the minds of the company; because they saw
nothing surprising in a physician’s being acquainted with all the
mysteries of his art; and, as their custom was already bespoke for
others of the profession, whom it was their interest to employ, our
adventurer might have starved amidst the caresses of his acquaintance,
had not he derived considerable advantage from a lucky accident in the
course of his expectancy.

A gentlewoman’s daughter, of a weakly constitution, by drinking the
waters, had so far recovered her health and complexion, as to allure
the affection of a young squire in the neighbourhood, who amused her
for some time with his addresses, until his heart was seduced by the
charms of another young lady lately arrived at the wells. The forsaken
nymph, shocked at this disgrace and mortification, relapsed into her
former languishing disorder; and was by her mother put under the
management and prescription of a physician, who had been an industrious
enemy of Fathom from his first appearance at Tunbridge. The patient,
though violently chagrined at the levity of her quondam admirer, was
not altogether without hope, that the very same inconstancy which had
prompted him to leave her, might in time induce him to return, after
the novelty of his new passion should be wore off; and this hope served
to support her under the sorrow and disgrace of her disappointment. At
length, however, the squire and his new mistress disappeared; and some
busybody was officious enough to communicate this piece of news to the
forlorn shepherdess, with this additional circumstance, that they were
gone to a neighbouring parish to be joined in the bands of wedlock.

These fatal tidings were no sooner imparted to the abandoned Phillis,
than she was seized with an hysteric fit; and, what rendered the
accident more unfortunate, her physician had been called to the
country, and was not expected at Tunbridge till next day. The
apothecary was immediately summoned; and, being either puzzled by the
symptoms, or afraid of encroaching upon the province of his superiors,
advised the old lady to send for Doctor Fathom without delay. She had
no other objection to this expedient, but the enmity which she knew
subsisted between the two leeches; yet, hearing that her own doctor
would not consult with Fathom upon his return but, perhaps renounce the
patient, by which means her daughter’s health might be endangered, she
would not solicit our hero’s assistance, until the young lady had
remained seven hours speechless and insensible; when, her fear
prevailing over every other consideration, she implored the advice of
our adventurer, who, having made the necessary interrogations, and felt
the patient’s pulse, which was regular and distinct, found reason to
conclude that the fit would not last much longer, and, after having
observed that she was in a very dangerous way, prescribed some
medicines for external application; and, to enhance their opinion of
his diligence and humanity, resolved to stay in the room and observe
their effect.

His judgment did not fail him on this occasion. In less than half an
hour after his embrocations had been applied, she recovered the use of
her tongue, opened her eyes, and having, in delirious exclamations,
upbraided her perfidious lover, became quite sensible and composed,
though she continued extremely low and dejected. To remedy these
sinkings, certain cordials were immediately administered, according to
the prescription of Doctor Fathom, upon whom extraordinary encomiums
were bestowed by all present, who believed he had actually rescued her
from the jaws of death; and as he was by this time let into the secrets
of the family, he found himself in a fair way of being an egregious
favourite of the old gentlewoman; when, unluckily, his brother, having
dismissed his country patient with uncommon despatch, entered the
apartment, and eyed his rival with looks of inexpressible rage; then,
surveying the patient, and the phials that stood upon the table, by
turns, “What, in the name of God!” cried he, “is the meaning of all
this trash!”

“Really, doctor,” replied the mother, a little confounded at being thus
taken by surprise, “Biddy has been taken dangerously ill, and lain
seven or eight hours in a severe fit, from which I am confident she
would never have recovered without the help of a physician; and as you
were absent, we had recourse to this gentleman, whose prescription hath
had a happy and surprising effect.” “Effect!” cried this offended
member of the faculty, “pshaw!—stuff!—who made you judge of effects or
causes?” Then advancing to the patient, “What has been the matter, Miss
Biddy, that you could not wait till my return?”

Here Fathom interposing, “Sir,” said he, “if you will step into the
next room, I will communicate my sentiments of the case, together with
the method upon which I have proceeded, that we may deliberate upon the
next step that is to be taken.” Instead of complying with this
proposal, he seated himself in a chair, with his back to our
adventurer, and, while he examined Miss Biddy’s pulse, gave him to
understand, that he should not consult with him about the matter.

Fathom, not in the least disconcerted at this uncivil answer, walked
round his antagonist, and, placing himself in his front, desired to
know his reason for treating him with such supercilious contempt. “I am
resolved,” said the other, “never to consult with any physician who has
not taken his degrees at either of the English universities.” “Upon the
supposition,” replied our adventurer, “that no person can be properly
educated for the profession at any other school.” “You are in the
right,” answered Doctor Looby; “that is one of many reasons I have to
decline the consultation.”

“How far you are in the right,” retorted Fathom, “I leave the world to
judge, after I have observed, that, in your English universities, there
is no opportunity of studying the art; no, not so much as a lecture
given on the subject. Nor is there one physician of note in this
kingdom who has not derived the greatest part of his medical knowledge
from the instructions of foreigners.”

Looby, incensed at this asseveration, which he was not prepared to
refute, exclaimed, in a most infuriate accent, “Who are you?—whence
came you?—where was you bred? You are one of those, I believe, who
graduate themselves, and commence doctors, the Lord knows how; an
interloper, who, without licence or authority, comes hither to take the
bread out of the mouths of gentlemen who have been trained to the
business in a regular manner, and bestowed great pains and expense to
qualify themselves for the profession. For my own part, my education
cost me fifteen hundred pounds.”

“Never was money laid out to less purpose,” said Ferdinand; “for it
does not appear that you have learned so much as the basis of medical
requirements, namely, that decorum and urbanity which ought to
distinguish the deportment of every physician. You have even debased
the noblest and most beneficial art that ever engaged the study of
mankind, which cannot be too much cultivated, and too little
restrained, in seeking to limit the practice of it to a set of
narrow-minded, illiberal wretches, who, like the lowest handicraftsmen,
claim the exclusive privileges of a corporation. Had you doubted my
ability, you ought to have satisfied yourself in a manner consistent
with decency and candour; but your behaviour on this occasion is such a
malicious outrage upon good manners and humanity, that, were it not for
my regard to these ladies, I would chastise you for your insolence on
the spot. Meanwhile, madam,” addressing himself to the mother, “you
must give me leave to insist upon your dismissing either that
gentleman, or me, without hesitation.”

This peremptory language had an instantaneous effect upon the hearers.
Looby’s face grew pale, and his nether lip began to tremble. The
patient was dismayed, and the old gentlewoman concerned and perplexed.
She earnestly besought the gentlemen to be reconciled to each other,
and enter into a friendly consultation upon her daughter’s distemper;
but, finding both equally averse to accommodation, and Fathom becoming
more and more importunate in his demand, she presented him with a
double fee; and giving him to understand that Doctor Looby had long
attended the family, and was intimately acquainted with her own and
Biddy’s constitution, said, she hoped he would not take it amiss if she
retained her old physician.

Though our hero was much mortified at this triumph of his rival, he
made a virtue of necessity, and retired with great complaisance,
wishing that Miss Biddy might never again be the subject of such a
disagreeable dispute. Whether the patient was frighted at this
altercation, or displeased with her mother’s decision against an
agreeable young fellow, who had, as it were, recalled her from the
grave, and made himself master of the secret that rankled at her heart,
or the disease had wound up her nerves for another paroxysm, certain it
is, she all of a sudden broke forth into a violent peal of laughter,
which was succeeded by the most doleful cries, and other expressions of
grief; then she relapsed into a fit, attended with strong convulsions,
to the unspeakable terror of the old gentlewoman, who entreated Doctor
Looby to be expeditious in his prescription. Accordingly he seized the
pen with great confidence, and a whole magazine of antihysteric
medicines were, in different forms, externally and internally applied.

Nevertheless, either nature was disturbed in her own efforts by these
applications, or the patient was resolved to disgrace the doctor. For
the more remedies that were administered, her convulsions became the
more violent; and in spite of all his endeavours, he could not overcome
the obstinacy of the distemper. Such a miscarriage, upon the back of
his rival’s success, could not fail to overwhelm him with confusion;
especially as the mother baited him with repeated entreaties to do
something for the recovery of her daughter. At length, after having
exercised her patience in vain for several hours, this affectionate
parent could no longer suppress the suggestions of her concern, but, in
an incoherent strain, told him that her duty would not suffer her to be
longer silent in an affair on which depended the life of her dear
child. That she had seen enough to believe he had mistaken the case of
poor Biddy, and he could not justly blame her for recalling Doctor
Fathom, whose prescription had operated in a miraculous manner.

Looby, shocked at this proposal, protested against it with great
vehemence, as an expedient highly injurious to himself. “My remedies,”
said he, “are just beginning to take effect, and, in all probability,
the fit will not last much longer; so that, by calling in another
person at this juncture, you will defraud me of that credit which is my
due, and deck my adversary with trophies to which he has no
pretension.” She was prevailed upon, by this remonstrance, to wait
another half hour, when perceiving, as yet, no alteration for the
better, and being distracted with her fears, which reproached her with
want of natural affection, she sent a message to Doctor Fathom,
desiring to see him with all possible despatch.

He was not slow in obeying the call, but hastening to the scene of
action, was not a little surprised to find Looby still in the
apartment. This gentleman, since better might not be, resolved to
sacrifice his pride to his interest, and, rather than lose his patient
altogether, and run the risk of forfeiting his reputation at the same
time, stayed with intention to compromise his difference with Fathom,
that he might not be wholly excluded from the honour of the cure, in
case it could be effected. But he had reckoned without his host in his
calculation of the Count’s placability; for, when he put on his
capitulating face, and, after a slight apology for his late behaviour,
proposed that all animosity should subside in favour of the young lady,
whose life was at stake, our hero rejected his advances with infinite
disdain, and assured the mother, in a very solemn tone, that, far from
consulting with a man who had treated him so unworthily, he would not
stay another minute in the house, unless he should see him discarded; a
satisfaction barely sufficient to atone for the affront he himself had
suffered by the unjust preference she had before given to his rival.

There was no remedy. Looby was obliged to retreat in his turn; then our
adventurer, approaching the bedside, reconnoitred the patient, examined
the medicines which had been administered, and lifting up his eyes in
expressive silence, detached the footman with a new order to the
apothecary. It was well the messenger used expedition, otherwise Doctor
Fathom would have been anticipated by the operation of nature; for, the
fit having almost run its career, Miss Biddy was on the point of
retrieving her senses, when the frontal prescribed by Fathom was
applied; to the efficacy of this, therefore, was ascribed her recovery,
when she opened her eyes, and began to pour forth unconnected
ejaculations; and in a few moments after, she was persuaded to swallow
a draught prepared for the purpose, her perception returned, and
Ferdinand gained the reputation of having performed a second miracle.

But he was furnished with a piece of intelligence, of much more energy
than all she had taken, and so soon as he concluded she was capable to
bear the news without any dangerous emotion, he, among other articles
of chit-chat culled for her amusement, took the opportunity of telling
the company, that Squire Stub (the cause of Miss Biddy’s disorder) had,
in his way to matrimony, been robbed of his bride, by a gentleman to
whom she had been formerly engaged. He had waited for her on purpose at
an inn on the road, where he found means to appease her displeasure,
which he had, it seems, incurred, and to supersede her new lover, whom
she quitted without ceremony; upon which the squire had returned to
Tunbridge, cursing her levity, yet blessing his good stars for having
so seasonably prevented his ruin, which would have infallibly been the
consequence of his marrying such an adventurer.

It would be superfluous to observe, that these tidings operated like an
admirable specific on the spirits of the young lady, who, while she
affected to pity the squire, was so much overjoyed at his
disappointment, that her eyes began to sparkle with uncommon vivacity,
and in less than two hours after the last of those terrible attacks,
she was restored to a better state of health than she had enjoyed for
many weeks. Fathom was not forgot amidst the rejoicings of the family.
Besides an handsome gratuity for the effects of his extraordinary
skill, the old lady favoured him with a general invitation to her
house, and the daughter not only considered him as the restorer of her
health, and angel of her good fortune, but also began to discover an
uncommon relish for his conversation; so that he was struck with the
prospect of succeeding Squire Stub in her affection. A conquest which,
if sanctioned by the approbation of the mother, would console him for
all the disappointments he had sustained; for Miss Biddy was entitled
to a fortune of ten thousand pounds, provided she should marry with the
consent of her parent, who was the sole executrix of the father’s will.

Animated with the hope of such an advantageous match, our adventurer
missed no opportunity of improving the lodgment he had made, while the
two ladies failed not to extol his medical capacity among all their
female acquaintances. By means of this circulation, his advice was
demanded in several other cases, which he managed with such an imposing
air of sagacity and importance, that his fame began to spread, and
before the end of the season, he had ravished more than one half of the
business from his competitor. Notwithstanding these fortunate events,
he foresaw, that he should find great difficulty in transplanting his
reputation, so as to take root in London, which was the only soil in
which he could propose to rise to any degree of prosperity and
independence; and this reflection was grounded upon a maxim which
universally prevails among the English people, namely, to overlook and
wholly neglect, on their return to the metropolis, all the connexions
they may have chanced to acquire during their residence at any of the
medical wells. And this social disposition is so scrupulously
maintained, that two persons who lived in the most intimate
correspondence at Bath or Tunbridge, shall in four-and-twenty hours so
totally forget their friendship, as to meet in St. James’s Park,
without betraying the least token of recognition; so that one would
imagine these mineral waters were so many streams issuing from the
river Lethe, so famed of old for washing away all traces of memory and
recollection.

Aware of this oblivious principle, Doctor Fathom collected all his
qualifications, in order to make such an impression upon the heart of
Miss Biddy, as would resist all her endeavours to shake him from her
remembrance; and his efforts succeeded so well, that Squire Stub’s
advances to a reconciliation were treated with manifest indifference.
In all probability our hero would have made a very advantageous
campaign, had not his good fortune been retarded by an obstruction,
which, as he did not perceive it, he could not possibly surmount. In
displaying his accomplishments to captivate the daughter, he had
unwittingly made an absolute conquest of the mother, who superintended
the conduct of Miss Biddy with such jealous vigilance, that he could
find no opportunity of profiting by the progress he had made in her
heart; for the careful matron would never lose sight of her, no, not
for one moment.

Had the old lady given the least intimation to our adventurer, of the
sentiments she entertained in his behalf, his complaisance was of such
a pliable texture, that he would have quitted his other pursuit, and
made her the sole object of his attention. But she either depended upon
the effect of his own good taste and discernment, or was too proud to
disclose a passion which he had hitherto overlooked.




CHAPTER FIFTY-TWO

REPAIRS TO THE METROPOLIS, AND ENROLS HIMSELF AMONG THE SONS OF PAEAN.


Before this affair could be brought to a proper explanation, the season
being almost ended, the ladies departed from Tunbridge, and in a little
time Doctor Fathom followed them to London, having previously obtained
permission to visit them in that metropolis. He had solicited the same
favour of some other families, in which he hoped to take root, though
he knew they were pre-engaged to different physicians; and resolving to
make his first medical appearance in London with some eclat, he not
only purchased an old chariot, which was new painted for the purpose,
but likewise hired a footman, whom he clothed in laced livery, in order
to distinguish himself from the common run of his brethren.

This equipage, though much more expensive than his finances could bear,
he found absolutely necessary to give him a chance for employment; as
every shabby retainer to physic, in this capital, had provided himself
with a vehicle, which was altogether used by way of a travelling
sign-post, to draw in customers; so that a walking physician was
considered as an obscure pedlar, trudging from street to street, with
his pack of knowledge on his shoulders, and selling his remnants of
advice by retail. A chariot was not now set up for the convenience of a
man sinking under the fatigue of extensive practice, but as a piece of
furniture every way as necessary as a large periwig with three tails;
and a physician, let his merit, in other respects, be never so
conspicuous, can no more expect to become considerable in business,
without the assistance of this implement, than he can hope to live
without food, or breathe without a windpipe.

This requisite is so well understood, that, exclusive of those who
profess themselves doctors, every raw surgeon, every idle apothecary,
who can make interest with some foolhardy coachmaker, may be seen
dancing the bays in all places of public resort, and grinning to one
another from their respective carriages. Hence proceed many of those
cruel accidents which are recorded in the daily papers. An apothecary’s
horses take fright, and run away with his chariot, which is heard of no
more. An eminent surgeon being overturned, is so terrified at the
thoughts of mutilation, that he resolves to walk on foot all the days
of his life; and the coachman of a physician of great practice, having
the misfortune to be disabled by a fall from the box, his master can
never find another to supply his place.

None of these observations escaped the penetrating eye of Fathom, who,
before he pretended to seat himself in this machine, had made proper
inquiry into all the other methods practised, with a view to keep the
wheels in motion. In his researches, he found that the great world was
wholly engrossed by a few practitioners who had arrived at the summit
of reputation, consequently were no longer obliged to cultivate those
arts by which they rose; and that the rest of the business was
parcelled out into small enclosures, occupied by different groups of
personages, male and female, who stood in rings, and tossed the ball
from one to another, there being in each department two sets, the
individuals of which relieved one another occasionally. Every knot was
composed of a waiting-woman, nurse, apothecary, surgeon, and physician,
and sometimes a midwife was admitted into the party; and in this manner
the farce was commonly performed.

A fine lady, fatigued with idleness, complains of the vapours, is
deprived of her rest, though not so sick as to have recourse to
medicine. Her favourite maid, tired with giving her attendance in the
night, thinks proper, for the benefit of her own repose, to complain of
a violent headache, and recommends to her mistress a nurse of approved
tenderness and discretion; at whose house, in all likelihood, the said
chambermaid hath oft given the rendezvous to a male friend. The nurse,
well skilled in the mysteries of her occupation, persuades the patient,
that her malady, far from being slight or chimerical, may proceed to a
very dangerous degree of the hysterical affection, unless it be nipt in
the bud by some very effectual remedy. Then she recounts a surprising
cure performed by a certain apothecary, and appeals to the testimony of
the waiting-woman, who being the gossip of his wife, confirms the
evidence, and corroborates the proposal. The apothecary being summoned,
finds her ladyship in such a delicate situation, that he declines
prescribing, and advises her to send for a physician without delay. The
nomination of course falls to him, and the doctor being called,
declares the necessity of immediate venesection, which is accordingly
performed by a surgeon of the association.

This is one way of beginning the game. Though the commencement often
varies, and sometimes the apothecary and sometimes the physician opens
the scene; but, be that as it will, they always appear in a string,
like a flight of wild geese, and each confederacy maintains a
correspondence with one particular undertaker. Fathom, upon these
considerations, set up his rest in the first floor of an apothecary in
the neighbourhood of Charing Cross, to whom he was introduced by a
letter from a friend at Tunbridge, and who being made acquainted with
his ability and scheme, promised to let slip no opportunity of serving
him; and, indeed, seemed to espouse his interest with great alacrity.
He introduced him to some of his patients, on the strength of a gratis
visit, sounded forth his praise among all the good women of his
acquaintance; and even prevailed upon him to publish advertisements,
importing that he would every day, at a certain time and place, give
his advice to the poor for nothing; hoping that, by means of some lucky
cure, his fame might be extended, and his practice grow into request.

In the meantime his chariot rolled along through all the most
frequented streets, during the whole forenoon, and, at the usual hour,
he never failed to make his appearance at the medical coffee-house,
with all that solemnity of feature and address, by which the modern
sons of Paean are distinguished; not but that he was often puzzled
about the decision of his diurnal route. For the method of driving up
one street and down another, without halting, was become such a stale
expedient, that the very ’prentices used to stand at the shop doors,
and ridicule the vain parade. At length, however, he perused the map of
London with great diligence, and, having acquired a distinct idea of
its topography, used to alight at the end of long narrow thoroughfares
and paved courts, where the chariot was ordered to wait till his
return; and, walking with great gravity through the different turnings
of these alleys, regain his carriage by another passage, and resume his
seat with an air of vast importance. With a view to protract the time
of his supposed visits, he would, at one place, turn aside to a wall;
at another, cheapen an urinal; at a third corner, read a quack
advertisement, or lounge a few minutes in some bookseller’s shop; and,
lastly, glide into some obscure coffee-house, and treat himself with a
dram of usquebaugh.

The other means used to force a trade, such as ordering himself to be
called from church, alarming the neighbourhood with knocking at his
door in the night, receiving sudden messages in places of resort, and
inserting his cures by way of news in the daily papers, had been so
injudiciously hackneyed by every desperate sculler in physic, that they
had lost their effect upon the public, and therefore were excluded from
the plan of our adventurer, whose scheme, for the present, was to exert
himself in winning the favour of those sage Sibyls, who keep, as it
were, the temple of medicine, and admit the young priest to the service
of the altar; but this he considered as a temporary project only, until
he should have acquired interest enough to erect an hospital, lock, or
infirmary, by the voluntary subscription of his friends, a scheme which
had succeeded to a miracle with many of the profession, who had raised
themselves into notice upon the carcases of the poor.

Yet even this branch was already overstocked, insomuch that almost
every street was furnished with one of these charitable receptacles,
which, instead of diminishing the taxes for the maintenance of the
poor, encouraged the vulgar to be idle and dissolute, by opening an
asylum to them and their families, from the diseases of poverty and
intemperance. For it remains to be proved, that the parish rates are
decreased, the bills of mortality lessened, the people more numerous,
or the streets less infested with beggars, notwithstanding the immense
sums yearly granted by individuals for the relief of the indigent.

But, waiving these reflections, Doctor Fathom hoped, that his landlord
would be a most useful implement for extending his influence, and, for
that reason, admitted him into a degree of partnership, after being
fully convinced that he was not under articles to any other physician.
Nevertheless, he was very much mistaken in reckoning on the importance
of his new ally, who was, like himself, a needy adventurer, settled
upon credit, and altogether unemployed, except among the very refuse of
the people, whom no other person would take the trouble to attend. So
that our hero got little else than experience and trouble, excepting a
few guineas which he made shift to glean among sojourners, with whom he
became occasionally acquainted, or young people, who had been
unfortunate in their amours.

In the midst of these endeavours, he did not omit his duty to the old
gentlewoman, whose daughter he had cured at Tunbridge; and was always
received with particular complacency, which, perhaps, he, in some
measure, owed to his genteel equipage, that gave credit to every door
before which it was seen; yet, Miss Biddy was as inaccessible as ever,
while the mother became more and more warm in her civilities, till at
length, after having prepared him with some extraordinary compliments,
she gave him to understand, that Biddy was no better than a
giddy-headed girl, far from being unexceptionable in her moral
character, and particularly deficient in duty and gratitude to her, who
had been always a tender and indulgent parent; she was therefore
determined to punish the young minx for her levity and want of natural
affection, by altering her own condition, could she find a worthy and
agreeable man, on whom she could bestow her hand and fortune without a
blush.

The film was instantly removed from Fathom’s eyes by this declaration,
which she uttered with such a significancy of look, as thrilled to his
soul with joyful presage, while he replied, it would, indeed, be a
difficult task to find a man who merited such happiness and honour;
but, surely, some there were, who would task their faculties to the
uttermost, in manifesting their gratitude, and desire of rendering
themselves worthy of such distinction. Though this answer was
pronounced in such a manner as gave her to understand he had taken the
hint, she would not cheapen her condescension so much as to explain
herself further at that juncture, and he was very well contented to woo
her on her own terms; accordingly he began to season his behaviour with
a spice of gallantry, when he had opportunities of being particular
with this new inamorata, and, in proportion to the returns she made, he
gradually detached himself from Miss Biddy, by intermitting, and, at
last, discontinuing those ardent expressions of love and admiration,
which he had made shift to convey in private looks and stolen whispers,
during the rancorous inspection of her mother.

Such alteration could not long escape the jealous eyes of the young
lady, no more than the cause of this alienation, which, in a moment,
converted all her love into irreconcilable hate, and filled her whole
soul with the most eager desire of vengeance. For she now not only
considered him as a mercenary wretch, who had slighted her attractions
for the sordid gratifications of avarice, but also as an interloper,
who wanted to intercept her fortune, in the odious character of a
father-in-law. But, before she could bring her aim to any ripeness of
contrivance, her mother, having caught cold at church, was seized with
a rheumatic fever, became delirious in less than three days, and,
notwithstanding all the prescriptions and care of her admirer, gave up
the ghost, without having retrieved the use of her senses, or been able
to manifest, by will, the sentiments she entertained in favour of her
physician, who, as the reader will easily perceive, had more reasons
than one to be mortally chagrined at this event.

Miss Biddy being thus put in possession of the whole inheritance, not
only renounced all correspondence with Doctor Fathom, by forbidding him
the house, but likewise took all opportunities of prejudicing his
character, by hinting, that her dear mamma had fallen a sacrifice to
his ignorance and presumption.




CHAPTER FIFTY-THREE

ACQUIRES EMPLOYMENT IN CONSEQUENCE OF A LUCKY MISCARRIAGE.


These ill offices, however, far from answering her purpose, had a quite
contrary effect. For, in consequence of her invectives, he was, in a
few days, called to the wife of a merchant, who piously hoped, that his
practice would not give Miss Biddy the lie. The patient had long
lingered under a complication of distempers, and being in no immediate
danger of her life, Doctor Fathom was in no hurry to strike a decisive
stroke; till the husband growing impatient of delay, and so explicit in
his hints, that it was impossible to misapprehend his meaning, our
adventurer resolved to do something effectual for his satisfaction, and
prescribed a medicine of such rough operation, as he thought must
either oblige his employer, or produce a change in the lady’s
constitution, that would make a noise in the world, and bring a new
accession to his fame.

Proceeding upon these maxims, he could not be disappointed. The remedy
played its part with such violence, as reduced the patient to
extremity, and the merchant had actually bespoke an undertaker; when,
after a series of swoonings and convulsions, nature so far prevailed,
as to expel, at once, the prescription and the disease; yet the
good-natured husband was so much affected with the agonies to which he
saw the wife of his bosom exposed by this specific, that, although the
effect of it was her perfect recovery, he could never bear the sight of
Fathom for the future, nor even hear his name mentioned, without giving
signs of horror and indignation. Nay, he did not scruple to affirm,
that, had our adventurer been endowed with the least tincture of
humanity, he would have suffered the poor woman to depart in peace,
rather than restore her to health, at the expense of such anxiety and
torture.

On the other hand, this extraordinary cure was blazoned abroad by the
good lady and her gossips, with such exaggerations as roused the
astonishment of the public, and concurred with the report of his last
miscarriage to bring him upon the carpet, as the universal subject of
discourse. When a physician becomes the town talk, he generally
concludes his business more than half done, even though his fame should
wholly turn upon his malpractice; insomuch that some members of the
faculty have been heard to complain, that they never had the good
fortune to be publicly accused of homicide; and it is well known, that
a certain famous empiric, of our day, never flourished to any degree of
wealth and reputation till after he had been attacked in print, and
fairly convicted of having destroyed a good number of the human
species. Success raised upon such a foundation would, by a disciple of
Plato, and some modern moralists, be ascribed to the innate virtue and
generosity of the human heart, which naturally espouses the cause that
needs protection. But I, whose notions of human excellence are not
quite so sublime, am apt to believe it is owing to that spirit of
self-conceit and contradiction, which is, at least, as universal, if
not as natural, as the moral sense so warmly contended for by those
ideal philosophers.

The most infamous wretch often finds his account in these principles of
malevolence and self-love. For wheresoever his character falls under
discussion there is generally some person present, who, either from an
affectation of singularity, or envy to the accusers, undertakes his
defence, and endeavours to invalidate the articles of his impeachment,
until he is heated by altercation, and hurried into more effectual
measures for his advantage. If such benefits accrue to those who have
no real merit to depend upon, surely our hero could not but reap
something extraordinary from the debates to which he now gave rise; as,
by the miraculous cure he had affected, all his patient’s friends, all
the enemies of her husband, all those who envied his other adversary,
were interested in his behalf, exclusive of such admirers as surprise
and curiosity might engage in his cause.

Thus wafted upon the wings of applause, his fame soon diffused itself
into all the corners of this great capital. The newspapers teemed with
his praise; and in order to keep up the attention of the public, his
emissaries, male and female, separated into different coffee-houses,
companies, and clubs, where they did not fail to comment upon these
articles of intelligence. Such a favourable incident is, of itself,
sufficient to float the bark of a man’s fortune. He was, in a few days,
called to another lady, labouring under the same disorder he had so
successfully dispelled, and she thought herself benefited by his
advice. His acquaintance naturally extended itself among the visitants
and allies of his patients; he was recommended from family to family;
the fees began to multiply; a variety of footmen appeared every day at
his door; he discontinued his sham circuit, and looking upon the
present conjuncture, as that tide in his affairs, which, according to
Shakespeare, when taken at the full, leads on to fortune, he resolved
that the opportunity should not be lost, and applied himself with such
assiduity to his practice, that, in all likelihood, he would have
carried the palm from all his contemporaries, had he not split upon the
same rock which had shipwrecked his hopes before.

We have formerly descanted upon that venereal appetite which glowed in
the constitution of our adventurer, and with all his philosophy and
caution could hardly keep within bounds. The reader, therefore, will
not be much surprised to learn, that, in the exercise of his
profession, he contracted an intimacy with a clergyman’s wife, whom he
attended as a physician, and whose conjugal virtue he subdued by a long
and diligent exertion of his delusive arts, while her mind was
enervated by sickness, and her husband abroad upon his necessary
occasions. This unhappy patient, who was a woman of an agreeable person
and lively conversation, fell a sacrifice to her own security and
self-conceit; her want of health had confined her to a sedentary life,
and her imagination being active and restless, she had spent those
hours in reading which other young women devote to company and
diversion, but, as her studies were not superintended by any person of
taste, she had indulged her own fancy without method or propriety. The
Spectator taught her to be a critic and philosopher; from plays she
learned poetry and wit, and derived her knowledge of life from books of
history and adventures. Fraught with these acquisitions, and furnished
by nature with uncommon vivacity, she despised her own sex, and courted
the society of men, among whom she thought her talents might be more
honourably displayed, fully confident of her own virtue and sagacity,
which enabled her to set all their arts at defiance.

Thus qualified, she, in an evil hour, had recourse to the advice of our
adventurer, for some ailment under which she had long laboured, and
found such relief from his skill as very much prepossessed her in his
favour. She was no less pleased with his obliging manners than with his
physic, and found much entertainment in his conversation, so that the
acquaintance proceeded to a degree of intimacy, during which he
perceived her weak side, and being enamoured of her person, flattered
her out of all her caution. The privilege of his character furnished
him with opportunities to lay snares for her virtue, and, taking
advantage of that listlessness, languor, and indolence of the spirits,
by which all the vigilance of the soul is relaxed, he, after a long
course of attention and perseverance, found means to make shipwreck of
her peace.

Though he mastered her chastity, he could not quiet her conscience,
which incessantly upbraided her with breach of the marriage vow; nor
did her undoer escape without a share of the reproaches suggested by
her penitence and remorse. This internal anxiety co-operating with her
disease, and perhaps with the medicines he prescribed, reduced her to
the brink of the grave; when her husband returned from a neighbouring
kingdom, in consequence of her earnest request, joined to the
information of her friends, who had written to him an account of the
extremity in which she was. The good man was afflicted beyond measure
when he saw himself upon the verge of losing a wife whom he had always
tenderly loved; but what were his emotions, when she, taking the first
opportunity of his being alone with her, accosted him to this effect:

“I am now hastening towards that dissolution from which no mortal is
exempted, and though the prospect of futurity is altogether clouded and
uncertain, my conscience will not allow me to plunge into eternity
without unburdening my mind, and, by an ingenuous confession, making
all the atonement in my power for the ingratitude I have been guilty
of, and the wrongs I have committed against a virtuous husband, who
never gave me cause of complaint. You stand amazed at this preamble,
but alas! how will you be shocked when I own that I have betrayed you
in your absence, that I have trespassed against God and my marriage
vow, and fallen from the pride and confidence of virtue to the most
abject state of vice; yes, I have been unfaithful to your bed, having
fallen a victim to the infernal insinuations of a villain, who took
advantage of my weak and unguarded moments. Fathom is the wretch who
hath thus injured your honour, and ruined my unsuspecting innocence. I
have nothing to plead in alleviation of my crime but the most sincere
contrition of heart, and though, at any other juncture, I could not
expect your forgiveness, yet, as I now touch the goal of life, I trust
in your humanity and benevolence for that pardon which will lighten the
sorrows of my soul, and those prayers which I hope will entitle me to
favour at the throne of grace.”

The poor husband was so much overwhelmed with grief and confusion at
this unexpected address that he could not recollect himself till after
a pause of several minutes, when uttering a hollow groan, “I will not,”
said he, “aggravate your sufferings, by reproaching you with my wrongs,
though your conduct hath been but an ill return for all my tenderness
and esteem. I look upon it as a trial of my Christian patience, and
bear my misfortune with resignation; meanwhile, I forgive you from my
heart, and fervently pray that your repentance may be acceptable to the
Father of Mercy.” So saying, he approached her bedside, and embraced
her in token of his sincerity. Whether this generous condescension
diffused such a composure upon her spirits as tended to the ease and
refreshment of nature, which had been almost exhausted by disease and
vexation, certain it is, that from this day she began to struggle with
her malady in surprising efforts, and hourly gained ground, until her
health was pretty well re-established.

This recovery was so far beyond the husband’s expectation, that he
began to make very serious reflections on the event, and even to wish
he had not been quite so precipitate in pardoning the backslidings of
his wife; for, though he could not withhold his compassion from a dying
penitent, he did not at all relish the thoughts of cohabiting, as
usual, with a wife self-convicted of the violation of the matrimonial
contract; he therefore considered his declaration as no more than a
provisional pardon, to take place on condition of her immediate death,
and, in a little time, not only communicated to her his sentiments on
this subject, but also separated himself from her company, secured the
evidence of her maid, who had been confidant in her amour with Fathom,
and immediately set on foot a prosecution against our adventurer, whose
behaviour to his wife he did not fail to promulgate, with all its
aggravating circumstances. By these means the doctor’s name became so
notorious that every man was afraid of admitting him into his house,
and every woman ashamed of soliciting his advice.




CHAPTER FIFTY-FOUR

HIS ECLIPSE, AND GRADUAL DECLINATION.


Misfortunes seldom come single; upon the back of this hue and cry he
unluckily prescribed phlebotomy to a gentleman of some rank, who
chanced to expire during the operation, and quarrelled with his
landlord the apothecary, who charged him with having forgot the good
offices he had done him in the beginning of his career, and desired he
would provide himself with another lodging.

All these mishaps, treading upon the heels of one another, had a very
mortifying effect upon his practice. At every tea-table his name was
occasionally put to the torture, with that of the vile creature whom he
had seduced, though it was generally taken for granted by all those
female casuists, that she must have made the first advances, for it
could not be supposed that any man would take much trouble in laying
schemes for the ruin of a person whose attractions were so slender,
especially considering the ill state of her health, a circumstance that
seldom adds to a woman’s beauty or good-humour; besides, she was always
a pert minx, that affected singularity, and a masculine manner of
speaking, and many of them had foreseen that she would, some time or
other, bring herself into such a premunire. At all gossipings, where
the apothecary or his wife assisted, Fathom’s pride, ingratitude, and
malpractice were canvassed; in all clubs of married men he was
mentioned with marks of abhorrence and detestation, and every medical
coffee-house rung with his reproach. Instances of his ignorance and
presumption were quoted, and many particulars feigned for the purpose
of defamation, so that our hero was exactly in the situation of a
horseman, who, in riding at full speed for the plate, is thrown from
the saddle in the middle of the race, and left without sense or motion
upon the plain.

His progress, though rapid, had been so short, that he could not be
supposed to have laid up store against such a day of trouble, and as he
still cherished hopes of surmounting those obstacles which had so
suddenly started up in his way, he would not resign his equipage nor
retrench his expenses, but appeared as usual in all public places with
that serenity and confidence of feature which he had never deposited,
and maintained his external pomp upon the little he had reserved in the
days of his prosperity, and the credit he had acquired by the
punctuality of his former payments. Both these funds, however, failed
in a very little time, his lawsuit was a gulf that swallowed up all his
ready money, and the gleanings of his practice were scarce sufficient
to answer his pocket expenses, which now increased in proportion to the
decrease of business, for, as he had more idle time, and was less
admitted into private families, so he thought he had more occasion to
enlarge his acquaintance among his own sex, who alone were able to
support him in his disgrace with the other. He accordingly listed
himself in several clubs, and endeavoured to monopolise the venereal
branch of trade, though this was but an indifferent resource, for
almost all his patients of this class were such as either could not, or
would not, properly recompense the physician.

For some time he lingered in this situation, without going upwards or
downwards, floating like a wisp of straw at the turning of the tide,
until he could no longer amuse the person of whom he had hired his
coach-horses, or postpone the other demands, which multiplied upon him
every day. Then was his chariot overturned with a hideous crash, and
his face so much wounded with the shivers of the glass, which went to
pieces in the fall, that he appeared in the coffee-house with half a
dozen black patches upon his countenance, gave a most circumstantial
detail of the risk he had run, and declared, that he did not believe he
should ever hazard himself again in any sort of wheel carriage.

Soon after this accident, he took an opportunity of telling his
friends, in the same public place, that he had turned away his footman
on account of his drunkenness, and was resolved, for the future, to
keep none but maids in his service, because the menservants are
generally impudent, lazy, debauched, or dishonest; and after all,
neither so neat, handy, or agreeable as the other sex. In the rear of
this resolution, he shifted his lodgings into a private court, being
distracted with the din of carriages, that disturb the inhabitants who
live towards the open street; and gave his acquaintance to understand,
that he had a medical work upon the anvil, which he could not finish
without being indulged in silence and tranquillity. In effect, he
gradually put on the exteriors of an author. His watch, with an
horizontal movement by Graham, which he had often mentioned, and shown
as a very curious piece of workmanship, began, about this time, to be
very much out of order, and was committed to the care of a mender, who
was in no hurry to restore it. His tie-wig degenerated into a major; he
sometimes appeared without a sword, and was even observed in public
with a second day’s shirt. At last, his clothes became rusty; and when
he walked about the streets, his head turned round in a surprising
manner, by an involuntary motion in his neck, which he had contracted
by a habit of reconnoitring the ground, that he might avoid all
dangerous or disagreeable encounters.

Fathom, finding himself descending the hill of fortune with an acquired
gravitation, strove to catch at every twig, in order to stop or retard
his descent. He now regretted the opportunities he had neglected, of
marrying one of several women of moderate fortune, who had made
advances to him in the zenith of his reputation; and endeavoured, by
forcing himself into a lower path of life than any he had hitherto
trod, to keep himself afloat, with the portion of some tradesman’s
daughter, whom he meant to espouse. While he exerted himself in this
pursuit, he happened, in returning from a place about thirty miles from
London, to become acquainted, in the stage-coach, with a young woman of
a very homely appearance, whom, from the driver’s information, he
understood to be the niece of a country justice, and daughter of a
soap-boiler, who had lived and died in London, and left her, in her
infancy, sole heiress of his effects, which amounted to four thousand
pounds. The uncle, who was her guardian, had kept her sacred from the
knowledge of the world, resolving to effect a match betwixt her and his
own son; and it was with much difficulty he had consented to this
journey, which she had undertaken as a visit to her own mother, who had
married a second husband in town.

Fraught with these anecdotes, Fathom began to put forth his gallantry
and good-humour, and, in a word, was admitted by the lady to the
privilege of an acquaintance, in which capacity he visited her during
the term of her residence in London; and, as there was no time to be
lost, declared his honourable intentions. He had such a manifest
advantage, in point of personal accomplishments, over the young
gentleman who was destined for her husband, that she did not disdain
his proposals; and, before she set out for the country, he had made
such progress in her heart, that the day was actually fixed for their
nuptials, on which he faithfully promised to carry her off in a coach
and six. How to raise money for this expedition was all the difficulty
that remained; for, by this time, his finances were utterly dried up,
and his credit altogether exhausted. Upon a very pressing occasion, he
had formerly applied himself to a certain wealthy quack, who had
relieved his necessities by lending him a small sum of money, in return
for having communicated to him a secret medicine, which he affirmed to
be the most admirable specific that ever was invented. The nostrum had
been used, and, luckily for him, succeeded in the trial; so that the
empiric, in the midst of his satisfaction, began to reflect, that this
same Fathom, who pretended to be in possession of a great many
remedies, equally efficacious, would certainly become a formidable
rival to him in his business, should he ever be able to extricate
himself from his present difficulties.

In consequence of these suggestions, he resolved to keep our
adventurer’s head under water, by maintaining him in the most abject
dependence. Accordingly he had, from time to time, accommodated him
with small trifles, which barely served to support his existence, and
even for these had taken notes of hand, that he might have a scourge
over his head, in case he should prove insolent or refractory. To this
benefactor Fathom applied for a reinforcement of twenty guineas, which
he solicited with the more confidence, as that sum would certainly
enable him to repay all other obligations. The quack would advance the
money upon no other condition, than that of knowing the scheme, which
being explained, he complied with Ferdinand’s request; but, at the same
time, privately despatched an express to the young lady’s uncle, with a
full account of the whole conspiracy; so that, when the doctor arrived
at the inn, according to appointment, he was received by his worship in
person, who gave him to understand, that his niece had changed her
mind, and gone fifty miles farther into the country to visit a
relation. This was a grievous disappointment to Fathom, who really
believed his mistress had forsaken him through mere levity and caprice,
and was not undeceived till several months after her marriage with her
cousin, when, at an accidental meeting in London, she explained the
story of the secret intelligence, and excused her marriage, as the
effect of rigorous usage and compulsion.

Had our hero been really enamoured of her person, he might have
probably accomplished his wishes, notwithstanding the steps she had
taken. But this was not the case. His passion was of a different
nature, and the object of it effectually without his reach. With regard
to his appetite for women, as it was an infirmity of his constitution,
which he could not overcome, and as he was in no condition to gratify
it at a great expense, he had of late chosen a housekeeper from the
hundreds of Drury, and, to avoid scandal, allowed her to assume his
name. As to the intimation which had been sent to the country justice,
he immediately imputed it to the true author, whom he marked for his
vengeance accordingly; but, in the meantime, suppressed his resentment,
because he in some measure depended upon him for subsistence. On the
other hand, the quack, dreading the forwardness and plausibility of our
hero, which might, one time or other, render him independent, put a
stop to those supplies, on pretence of finding them inconvenient; but,
out of his friendship and goodwill to Fathom, undertook to procure for
him such letters of recommendation as would infallibly make his fortune
in the West Indies, and even to set him out in a genteel manner for the
voyage. Ferdinand perceived his drift, and thanked him for his generous
offer, which he would not fail to consider with all due deliberation;
though he was determined against the proposal, but obliged to
temporise, that he might not incur the displeasure of this man, at
whose mercy he lay. Meanwhile the prosecution against him in Doctors’
Commons drew near a period, and the lawyers were clamorous for money,
without which, he foresaw he should lose the advantage which his cause
had lately acquired by the death of his antagonist’s chief evidence; he
therefore, seeing every other channel shut up, began to doubt, whether
the risk of being apprehended or slain in the character of a
highwayman, was not overbalanced by the prospect of being acquitted of
a charge which had ruined his reputation and fortune, and actually
entertained thoughts of taking the air on Hounslow Heath, when he was
diverted from this expedient by a very singular adventure.




CHAPTER FIFTY-FIVE

AFTER DIVERS UNSUCCESSFUL EFFORTS, HE HAS RECOURSE TO THE MATRIMONIAL
NOOSE.


Chancing to meet with one of his acquaintance at a certain
coffee-house, the discourse turned upon the characters of mankind,
when, among other oddities, his friend brought upon the carpet a
certain old gentlewoman of such a rapacious disposition, that, like a
jackdaw, she never beheld any metalline substance, without an
inclination, and even an effort to secrete it for her own use and
contemplation. Nor was this infirmity originally produced from
indigence, inasmuch as her circumstances had been always affluent, and
she was now possessed of a considerable sum of money in the funds;
notwithstanding which, the avarice of her nature tempted her to let
lodgings, though few people could live under the same roof with such an
original, who, rather than be idle, had often filched pieces of her own
plate, and charged her servants with the theft, or hinted suspicion of
her lodgers. Fathom, struck with the description, soon perceived how
this woman’s disease might be converted to his advantage; and after
having obtained sufficient intelligence, on pretence of satisfying his
curiosity, he visited the widow, in consequence of a bill at her door,
and actually hired an apartment in her house, whither he forthwith
repaired with his inamorata.

It was not long before he perceived that his landlady’s character had
not been misrepresented. He fed her distemper with divers
inconsiderable trinkets, such as copper medals, corkscrews, odd
buckles, and a paltry seal set in silver, which were, at different
times, laid as baits for her infirmity, and always conveyed away with
remarkable eagerness, which he and his Dulcinea took pleasure in
observing from an unsuspected place. Thus confirmed in his opinion, he,
at length, took an opportunity of exposing a metal watch that belonged
to his mistress, and saw it seized with great satisfaction, in the
absence of his helpmate, who had gone abroad on purpose. According to
instruction, she soon returned, and began to raise a terrible clamour
about the loss of her watch; upon which she was condoled by her
landlady, who seemed to doubt the integrity of the maid, and even
proposed that Mrs. Fathom should apply to some justice of the peace for
a warrant to search the servant’s trunk. The lady thanked her for the
good advice, in compliance with which she had immediate recourse to a
magistrate, who granted a search warrant, not against the maid, but the
mistress; and she, in a little time, returned with the constable at her
back.

These precautions being taken, Doctor Fathom desired a private
conference with the old gentlewoman, in which he gave her to
understand, that he had undoubted proofs of her having secreted, not
only the watch, but also several other odd things of less consequence,
which he lost since his residence in her house. He then showed the
warrant he had obtained against her, and asked if she had anything to
offer why the constable should not do his duty? Inexpressible were the
anguish and confusion of the defendant, when she found herself thus
entrapped, and reflected, that she was on the point of being detected
of felony; for she at once concluded, that the snare was laid for her,
and knew that the officer of justice would certainly find the unlucky
watch in one of the drawers of her scrutoire.

Tortured with these suggestions, afraid of public disgrace, and
dreading the consequence of legal conviction, she fell on her knees
before the injured Fathom, and, after having imputed her crime to the
temptations of necessity, implored his compassion, promised to restore
the watch, and everything she had taken, and begged he would dismiss
the constable, that her reputation might not suffer in the eye of the
world.

Ferdinand, with a severity of countenance purposely assumed, observed
that, were she really indigent, he had charity enough to forgive what
she had done; but, as he knew her circumstances were opulent, he looked
upon this excuse as an aggravation of her guilt, which was certainly
the effect of a vicious inclination; and he was therefore determined to
prosecute her with the utmost severity of the law, as an example and
terror to others, who might be infected with the same evil disposition.
Finding him deaf to all her tears and entreaties, she changed her note,
and offered him one hundred guineas, if he would compromise the affair,
and drop the prosecution, so as that her character should sustain no
damage. After much argumentation, he consented to accept of double the
sum, which being instantly paid in East India bonds, Doctor Fathom told
the constable, that the watch was found; and for once her reputation
was patched up. This seasonable supply enabled our hero to stand trial
with his adversary, who was nonsuited, and also to mend his external
appearance, which of late had not been extremely magnificent.

Soon after this gleam of good fortune, a tradesman, to whom he was
considerably indebted, seeing no other probable means to recover his
money, introduced Fathom to the acquaintance of a young widow who
lodged at his house, and was said to be in possession of a considerable
fortune. Considering the steps that were taken, it would have been
almost impossible for him to miscarry in his addresses. The lady had
been bred in the country, was unacquainted with the world, and of a
very sanguine disposition, which her short trial of matrimony had not
served to cool. Our adventurer was instructed to call at the
tradesman’s house, as if by accident, at an appointed time, when the
widow was drinking tea with her landlady. On these occasions he always
behaved to admiration. She liked his person, and praised his
politeness, good-humour, and good sense; his confederates extolled him
as a prodigy of learning, taste, and good-nature; they likewise
represented him as a person on the eve of eclipsing all his competitors
in physic. An acquaintance and intimacy soon ensued, nor was he
restricted in point of opportunity. In a word, he succeeded in his
endeavours, and, one evening, on pretence of attending her to the play,
he accompanied her to the Fleet, where they were married, in presence
of the tradesman and his wife, who were of the party.

This grand affair being accomplished to his satisfaction, he, next day,
visited her brother, who was a counsellor of the Temple, to make him
acquainted with the step his sister had taken; and though the lawyer
was not a little mortified to find that she had made such a clandestine
match, he behaved civilly to his new brother-in-law, and gave him to
understand, that his wife’s fortune consisted of a jointure of one
hundred and fifty pounds a year, and fifteen hundred pounds bequeathed
to her during her widowhood, by her own father, who had taken the
precaution of settling it in the hands of trustees, in such a manner as
that any husband she might afterwards espouse should be restricted from
encroaching upon the capital, which was reserved for the benefit of her
heirs. This intimation was far from being agreeable to our hero, who
had been informed, that this sum was absolutely at the lady’s disposal,
and had actually destined the greatest part of it for the payment of
his debts, for defraying the expense of furnishing an elegant house,
and setting up a new equipage.

Notwithstanding this disappointment, he resolved to carry on his plan
upon the credit of his marriage, which was published in a very pompous
article of the newspapers; a chariot was bespoke, a ready furnished
house immediately taken, and Doctor Fathom began to reappear in all his
former splendour.

His good friend the empiric, alarmed at this event, which not only
raised our adventurer into the sphere of a dangerous rival, but also
furnished him with means to revenge the ill office he had sustained at
his hands on the adventure of the former match—for, by this time,
Fathom had given him some hints, importing, that he was not ignorant of
his treacherous behaviour—roused, I say, by these considerations, he
employed one of his emissaries, who had some knowledge of Fathom’s
brother-in-law, to prejudice him against our adventurer, whom he
represented as a needy sharper, not only overwhelmed with debt and
disgrace, but likewise previously married to a poor woman, who was
prevented by nothing but want from seeking redress at law. To confirm
these assertions, he gave him a detail of Fathom’s encumbrances, which
he had learned for the purpose, and even brought the counsellor into
company with the person who had lived with our hero before marriage,
and who was so much incensed at her abrupt dismission, that she did not
scruple to corroborate these allegations of the informer.

The lawyer, startled at this intelligence, set on foot a minute inquiry
into the life and conversation of the doctor, which turned out so
little to the advantage of his character and circumstances, that he
resolved, if possible, to disunite him from his family; and, as a
previous step, repeated to his sister all that he had heard to the
prejudice of her husband, not forgetting to produce the evidence of his
mistress, who laid claim to him by a prior title, which, she pretended,
could be proved by the testimony of the clergyman who joined them. Such
an explanation could not fail to inflame the resentment of the injured
wife, who, at the very first opportunity, giving a loose to the
impetuosity of her temper, upbraided our hero with the most bitter
invectives for his perfidious dealing.

Ferdinand, conscious of his own innocence, which he had not always to
plead, far from attempting to soothe her indignation, assumed the
authority and prerogative of a husband, and sharply reprehended her for
her credulity and indecent warmth. This rebuke, instead of silencing,
gave new spirit and volubility to her reproaches, in the course of
which she plainly taxed him with want of honesty and affection, and
said that, though his pretence was love, his aim was no other than a
base design upon her fortune.

Fathom, stung with these accusations, which he really did not deserve,
replied with uncommon heat, and charged her in his turn with want of
sincerity and candour, in the false account she had given of that same
fortune before marriage. He even magnified his own condescension, in
surrendering his liberty to a woman who had so little to recommend her
to the addresses of the other sex; a reflection which provoked this
mild creature to such a degree of animosity, that, forgetting her duty
and allegiance, she lent him a box on the ear with such energy as made
his eyes water; and he, for the honour of manhood and sovereignty,
having washed her face with a dish of tea, withdrew abruptly to a
coffee-house in the neighbourhood, where he had not long remained, when
his passion subsided, and he then saw the expediency of an immediate
reconciliation, which he resolved to purchase, even at the expense of a
submission.

It was pity that such a salutary resolution had not been sooner taken.
For, when he returned to his own house, he understood, that Mrs. Fathom
had gone abroad in a hackney-coach; and, upon examining her apartment,
in lieu of her clothes and trinkets, which she had removed with
admirable dexterity and despatch, he found this billet in one of the
drawers of her bureau:—“Sir, being convinced that you are a cheat and
an impostor, I have withdrawn myself from your cruelty and
machinations, with a view to solicit the protection of the law; and I
doubt not but I shall soon be able to prove, that you have no just
title to, or demand upon, the person or effects of the unfortunate
Sarah Muddy.”

The time had been when Mr. Fathom would have allowed Mrs. Muddy to
refine at her leisure, and blessed God for his happy deliverance; but
at present the case was quite altered. Smarting as he was from the
expense of lawsuits, he dreaded a prosecution for bigamy, which, though
he had justice on his side, he knew he could not of himself support.
Besides, all his other schemes of life were frustrated by this unlucky
elopement. He therefore speedily determined to anticipate, as much as
in him lay, the malice of his enemies, and to obtain, without delay,
authentic documents of his marriage. With this view, he hastened to the
house of the tradesman, who, with his wife, had been witness to the
ceremony and consummation; and, in order to interest them the more
warmly in his cause, made a pathetic recital of this unhappy breach, in
which he had suffered such injury and insult. But all his rhetoric
would not avail. Mrs. Muddy had been beforehand with him, and had
proved the better orator of the two; for she had assailed this honest
couple with such tropes and figures of eloquence, as were altogether
irresistible.

Nevertheless, they heard our hero to an end, with great patience. Then
the wife, who was the common mouth upon all such occasions, contracting
her features into a very formal disposition, “I’ll assure you,” said
she, “Doctor Fathom, my husband and I have been in a very great
terrification and numplush, to hear such bad things of a person, whom,
as one may say, we thought a worthy gentleman, and were ready to serve
at all times, by day and by night, as the saying is. And besides, for
all that, you know, and God knows, as we are dustrious people, and work
hard for what we get, and we have served gentlemen to our own harm,
whereby my husband was last Tuesday served with a siserary, being that
he was bound for an officer that ran away. And I said to my husband,
Timothy, says I, ’tis a very hard thing for one to ruin one’s self for
stranger people—There’s Doctor Fathom, says I, his account comes to
nine-and-forty pounds seven shillings and fourpence halfpenny; and you
know, doctor, that was before your last bill began. But, howsomever,
little did I think, as how a gentleman of your learning would go to
deceive a poor gentlewoman, when you had another wife alive.”

In vain did our adventurer endeavour to vindicate himself from this
aspersion; the good woman, like a great many modern disputants,
proceeded with her declamation, without seeming to hear what was said
on the other side of the question; and the husband was altogether
neutral. At length, Ferdinand, finding all his protestations
ineffectual, “Well,” said he, “though you are resolved, I see, to
discredit all that I can say in opposition to that scandalous slander,
of which I can easily acquit myself in a court of justice, surely you
will not refuse to grant me a certificate, signifying that you were
present at the ceremony of my marriage with this unhappy woman.” “You
shall excuse us,” replied the female orator; “people cannot be too wary
in signing their names in this wicked world; many a one has been
brought to ruination by signing his name, and my husband shall not,
with my goodwill, draw himself into such a primmineery.”

Fathom, alarmed at this refusal, earnestly argued against the
inhumanity and injustice of it, appealing to their own consciences for
the reasonableness of his proposal; but, from the evasive answers of
the wife, he had reason to believe, that, long before the time of
trial, they would take care to have forgotten the whole transaction.

Though he was equally confounded and incensed at this instance of their
perfidy, he durst not manifest his indignation, conscious of the
advantage they had over him in divers respects; but repaired, without
loss of time, to the lodging of the clergyman who had noosed him,
resolved to consult his register, and secure his evidence. Here too his
evil genius had got the start of him; for the worthy ecclesiastic not
only could not recollect his features, or find his name in the
register, but, when importuned by his pressing remonstrances, took
umbrage at the freedom of his behaviour, and threatened, if he would
not immediately take himself away, to raise the posse of the Fleet, for
the safety of his own person.

Rather than put the pastor to the trouble of alarming his flock, he
retreated with a heavy heart, and went in quest of his mistress, whom
he had dismissed at his marriage, in hopes of effecting a
reconciliation, and preventing her from joining in the conspiracy
against him. But, alas! he met with such a reception as he had reason
to expect from a slighted woman, who had never felt any real attachment
for his person. She did not upbraid him with his cruelty in leaving her
as a mistress, but, with a species of effrontery never enough to be
admired, reproached him with his villany, in abandoning her, who was
his true and lawful wife, to go and ruin a poor gentlewoman, by whose
fortune he had been allured.

When he attempted to expostulate with this virago, upon the barbarity
of this assertion, she very prudently declined engaging in private
conversation with such an artful and wicked man; and, calling up the
people of the house, insisted upon his being conducted to the door.




CHAPTER FIFTY-SIX

IN WHICH HIS FORTUNE IS EFFECTUALLY STRANGLED.


The last resource, and that upon which he least depended, was the
advice and assistance of his old friend the empiric, with whom he still
maintained a slight correspondence; and to whose house he steered his
course, in great perplexity and tribulation. That gentleman, instead of
consoling him with assurances of friendship and protection, faithfully
recapitulated all the instances of his indiscretion and misconduct,
taxed him with want of sincerity in the West India affair, as well as
with want of honesty in this last marriage, while his former wife was
alive; and, finally, reminded him of his notes, which he desired might
be immediately taken up, as he (the quack) had present occasion for a
sum of money.

Ferdinand, seeing it would be impracticable to derive any succour from
this quarter, sneaked homewards, in order to hold a consultation with
his own thoughts; and the first object that presented itself to his
eyes when he entered his apartment, was a letter from the tradesman,
with his account inclosed, amounting to forty-five pounds, which the
writer desired might be paid without delay. Before he had time to
peruse the articles, he received a summons, in consequence of a bill of
indictment for bigamy, found against him in Hicks’ Hall, by Sarah
Muddy, widow; and, while he was revolving measures to avert these
storms, another billet arrived from a certain attorney, giving him to
understand, that he had orders from Doctor Buffalo, the quack, to sue
him for the payment of several notes, unless he would take them up in
three days from the date of this letter.

Such a concurrence of sinister events made a deep impression upon the
mind of our adventurer. All his fortitude was insufficient to bear him
up against this torrent of misfortunes; his resources were all dried
up, his invention failed, and his reflection began to take a new turn.
“To what purpose,” said he to himself, “have I deserted the paths of
integrity and truth, and exhausted a fruitful imagination, in
contriving schemes to betray my fellow-creatures, if, instead of
acquiring a splendid fortune, which was my aim, I have suffered such a
series of mortifications, and at last brought myself to the brink of
inevitable destruction? By a virtuous exertion of those talents I
inherit from nature and education, I might, long before this time, have
rendered myself independent, and, perhaps, conspicuous in life. I might
have grown up like a young oak, which, being firmly rooted in its
kindred soil, gradually raises up its lofty head, expands its leafy
arms, projects a noble shade, and towers the glory of the plain. I
should have paid the debt of gratitude to my benefactors, and made
their hearts sing with joy for the happy effects of their benevolence.
I should have been a bulwark to my friends, a shelter to my neighbours
in distress. I should have run the race of honour, seen my fame
diffused like a sweet-smelling odour, and felt the ineffable pleasure
of doing good. Whereas I am, after a vicissitude of disappointments,
dangers, and fatigues, reduced to misery and shame, aggravated by a
conscience loaded with treachery and guilt. I have abused the
confidence and generosity of my patron; I have defrauded his family,
under the mask of sincerity and attachment; I have taken the most cruel
and base advantages of virtue in distress; I have seduced unsuspecting
innocence to ruin and despair; I have violated the most sacred trust
reposed in me by my friend and benefactor; I have betrayed his love,
torn his noble heart asunder, by means of the most perfidious slander
and false insinuations; and, finally, brought to an untimely grave the
fairest pattern of human beauty and perfection. Shall the author of
these crimes pass with impunity? Shall he hope to prosper in the midst
of such enormous guilt? It were an imputation upon Providence to
suppose it! Ah, no! I begin to feel myself overtaken by the eternal
justice of Heaven! I totter on the edge of wretchedness and woe,
without one friendly hand to save me from the terrible abyss!”

These reflections, which, perhaps, the misery of his fellow-creatures
would never have inspired, had he himself remained without the verge of
misfortune, were now produced from the sensation of his own calamities;
and, for the first time, his cheeks were bedewed with the drops of
penitence and sorrow. “Contraries,” saith Plato, “are productive of
each other.” Reformation is oftentimes generated from unsuccessful
vice; and our adventurer was, at this juncture, very well disposed to
turn over a new leaf in consequence of those salutary suggestions;
though he was far from being cured beyond the possibility of a relapse.
On the contrary, all the faculties of his soul were so well adapted,
and had been so long habituated to deceit, that, in order to extricate
himself from the evils that environed him, he would not, in all
probability, have scrupled to practise it upon his own father, had a
convenient opportunity occurred.

Be that as it may, he certainly, after a tedious and fruitless exercise
of his invention, resolved to effect a clandestine retreat from that
confederacy of enemies which he could not withstand, and once more join
his fortune to that of Renaldo, whom he proposed to serve, for the
future, with fidelity and affection, thereby endeavouring to atone for
the treachery of his former conduct. Thus determined, he packed up his
necessaries in a portmanteau, attempted to amuse his creditors with
promises of speedy payment, and, venturing to come forth in the dark,
took a place in the Canterbury stage-coach, after having converted his
superfluities into ready money. These steps were not taken with such
privacy as to elude the vigilance of his adversaries; for, although he
had been cautious enough to transport himself and his baggage to the
inn on Sunday evening, and never doubted that the vehicle, which set
out at four o’clock on Monday morning, would convey him out of the
reach of his creditors, before they could possibly obtain a writ for
securing his person, they had actually taken such precautions as
frustrated all his finesse; and the coach being stopped in the borough
of Southwark, Doctor Fathom was seized by virtue of a warrant obtained
on a criminal indictment, and was forthwith conducted to the prison of
the King’s Bench; yet, not before he had, by his pathetic
remonstrances, excited the compassion, and even drawn tears from the
eyes of his fellow-passengers.

He no sooner recollected himself from the shock which must have been
occasioned by this sinister incident, than he despatched a letter to
his brother-in-law, the counsellor, requesting an immediate conference,
in which he promised to make such a proposal as would save him all the
expense of a lawsuit and trial, and, at the same time, effectually
answer all the purposes of both. He was accordingly favoured with a
visit from the lawyer, to whom, after the most solemn protestations of
his own innocence, he declared, that, finding himself unable to wage
war against such powerful antagonists, he had resolved even to abandon
his indubitable right, and retire into another country, in order to
screen himself from persecution, and remove all cause of disquiet from
the prosecutrix, when he was, unfortunately, prevented by the warrant
which had been executed against him. He said he was still willing, for
the sake of his liberty, to sign a formal renunciation of his
pretensions to Mrs. Fathom and her fortune, provided the deeds could be
executed, and the warrant withdrawn, before he should be detained by
his other creditors; and, lastly, he conjured the barrister to spare
himself the guilt and the charge of suborning evidence for the
destruction of an unhappy man, whose misfortune was his only fault.

The lawyer felt the force of his expostulations; and though he would by
no means suppose him innocent of the charge of bigamy, yet, under the
pretext of humanity and commiseration, he undertook to persuade his
sister to accept of a proper release, which, he observed, would not be
binding, if executed during the confinement of Fathom; he therefore
took his leave, in order to prepare the papers, withdraw the action,
and take such other measures as would hinder the prisoner from giving
him the slip. Next day, he returned with an order to release our hero,
who, being formally discharged, was conducted by the lawyer to a tavern
in the neighbourhood, where the releases were exchanged, and everything
concluded with amity and concord. This business being happily
transacted, Fathom stept into a hackney-coach, with his baggage, and
was followed by a bailiff, who told him, with great composure, that he
was again a prisoner, at the suit of Doctor Buffalo, and desired the
coachman to reconduct him to the lodging he had so lately discharged.

Fathom, whose fortitude had been hitherto of the pagan temper, was now
fain to reinforce it with the philosophy of Christian resignation,
though he had not as yet arrived to such a pitch of self-denial as to
forgive the counsellor, to whose double dealing he imputed this new
calamity. After having received the compliments of the jailer on his
recommitment, he took pen, ink, and paper, and composed an artful and
affecting epistle to the empiric, imploring his mercy, flattering his
weakness, and demonstrating the bad policy of cooping up an unhappy man
in a jail, where he could never have an opportunity of doing justice to
his creditors; nor did he forget to declare his intention of retiring
into another country, where he might have some chance of earning a
subsistence, which he had so long toiled for to no purpose in England.
This last declaration he made in consequence of the jealous disposition
of the quack, who he knew had long looked upon him in the odious light
of an interloping rival. However, he reaped no benefit from this
supplication, which served only to gratify the pride of Buffalo, who
produced the extravagant encomiums which Fathom had bestowed upon him,
as so many testimonials of his foe’s bearing witness to his virtue.




CHAPTER FIFTY-SEVEN

FATHOM BEING SAFELY HOUSED, THE READER IS ENTERTAINED WITH A
RETROSPECT.


But now it is high time to leave our adventurer to chew the cud of
reflection and remorse in this solitary mansion, that we may trace
Renaldo in the several steps he took to assert his right, and do
justice to his family. Never man indulged a more melancholy train of
ideas than that which accompanied him in his journey to the Imperial
court. For, notwithstanding the manifold reasons he had to expect a
happy issue to his aim, his imagination was incessantly infected with
something that chilled his nerves and saddened his heart, recurring,
with quick succession, like the unwearied wave that beats upon the
bleak, inhospitable Greenland shore. This, the reader will easily
suppose, was no other than the remembrance of the forlorn Monimia,
whose image appeared to his fancy in different attitudes, according to
the prevalence of the passions which raged in his bosom. Sometimes he
viewed her in the light of apostasy, and then his soul was maddened
with indignation and despair. But these transitory blasts were not able
to efface the impressions she had formerly made upon his heart;
impressions which he had so often and so long contemplated with
inconceivable rapture. These pictures still remained, representing her
fair as the most perfect idea of beauty, soft and tender as an angel of
mercy and compassion, warmed with every virtue of the heart, and
adorned with every accomplishment of human nature. Yet the alarming
contrast came still in the rear of this recollection; so that his soul
was by turns agitated by the tempests of horror, and overwhelmed by the
floods of grief.

He recalled the moment on which he first beheld her, with that pleasing
regret which attends the memory of a dear deceased friend. Then he
bitterly cursed it, as the source of all his misfortunes and
affliction. He thanked Heaven for having blessed him with a friend to
detect her perfidy and ingratitude; and then ardently wished he had
still continued under the influence of her delusion. In a word, the
loneliness of his situation aggravated every horror of his reflection;
for, as he found himself without company, his imagination was never
solicited, or his attention diverted from these subjects of woe; and he
travelled to Brussels in a reverie, fraught with such torments as must
have entirely wrecked his reason, had not Providence interposed in his
behalf. He was, by his postillion, conducted to one of the best inns of
the place, where he understood the cloth was already laid for supper;
and as the ordinary is open to strangers in all these houses of
entertainment, he introduced himself into the company, with a view to
alleviate, in some measure, his sorrow and chagrin, by the conversation
of his fellow-guests. Yet he was so ill prepared to obtain the relief
which he courted, that he entered the apartment, and sat down to table,
without distinguishing either the number or countenances of those who
were present, though he himself did not long remain so unregarded. His
mien and deportment produced a prepossession in his favour; and the air
of affliction, so remarkable in his visage, did not fail to attract
their sympathy and observation.

Among the rest, was an Irish officer in the Austrian service, who
having eyed Renaldo attentively, “Sir,” said he, rising, “if my eyes
and memory do not deceive me, you are the Count de Melvil, with whom I
had the honour to serve upon the Rhine during the last war.” The youth,
hearing his own name mentioned, lifted up his eyes, and at once
recognising the other to be a gentleman who had been a captain in his
father’s regiment, ran forwards, and embraced him with great affection.

This was, in divers respects, a fortunate rencontre for young Melvil;
as the officer was not only perfectly well acquainted with the
situation of the Count’s family, but also resolved, in a few days, to
set out for Vienna, whither he promised to accompany Renaldo, as soon
as he understood his route lay the same way. Before the day fixed for
their departure arrived, this gentleman found means to insinuate
himself so far into the confidence of the Count, as to learn the cause
of that distress which he had observed in his features at their first
meeting; and being a gentleman of uncommon vivacity, as well as
sincerely attached to the family of Melvil, to which he had owed his
promotion, he exerted all his good-humour and good sense in amusing the
fancy, and reasoning down the mortification of the afflicted Hungarian.
He in particular endeavoured to wean his attention from the lost
Monimia, by engaging it upon his domestic affairs, and upon the wrongs
of his mother and sister, who, he gave him to understand, were
languishing under the tyranny of his father-in-law.

This was a note that effectually roused him from the lethargy of his
sorrow; and the desire of taking vengeance on the oppressor, who had
ruined his fortune, and made his nearest relations miserable, so
entirely engrossed his thoughts, as to leave no room for other
considerations. During their journey to Austria, Major Farrel, (that
was the name of his fellow-traveller,) informed him of many
circumstances touching his father’s house, to which himself was an
utter stranger.

“The conduct of your mother,” said he, “in marrying Count Trebasi, was
not at all agreeable either to the friends of the Count de Melvil, or
to her own relations, who knew her second husband to be a man of a
violent temper, and rapacious disposition, which the nature of his
education and employment had served rather to inflame than allay; for
you well know he was a partisan during the whole course of the late
war. They were, moreover, equally surprised and chagrined, when they
found she took no step to prevent his seizing upon that inheritance
which of right belonged to you, and which, by the laws of Hungary, is
unalienable from the heir of blood. Nevertheless, they are now fully
convinced, that she hath more than sufficiently atoned for her
indiscretion, by the barbarity of her husband, who hath not only
secluded her from all communication with her friends and acquaintance,
but even confined her to the west tower of your father’s house, where
she is said to be kept close prisoner, and subjected to all sorts of
inconvenience and mortification. This severity she is believed to have
incurred in consequence of having expostulated to him upon his unjust
behaviour to you and Mademoiselle, whom he hath actually shut up in
some convent in Vienna, which your relations have not as yet been able
to discover. But the memory of your noble father is so dear to all
those who were favoured with his friendship, and the sufferings of the
Countess and Mademoiselle have raised such a spirit of resentment
against her cruel jailor, that nothing is wanted but your presence to
begin the prosecution, and give a sanction to the measures of your
friends, which will in a little time restore your family to the
fruition of its rights and fortune. For my own part, my dear Count, I
consider myself as one wholly indebted to your house for the rank and
expectation I now enjoy; and my finances, interest, and person, such as
they are, I dedicate to your service.”

Renaldo was not slow in making his acknowledgments to this generous
Hibernian, whom he informed of his scheme, recounting to him his
uncommon transaction with the benevolent Jew, and communicating the
letters of recommendation he had received by his means to some of the
first noblemen at the Imperial court. Meanwhile, he burned with
impatience to chastise Count Trebasi for his perfidious conduct to the
widow and the fatherless, and would have taken the road to Presburg,
without touching at Vienna, in order to call him to a severe account,
had not he been strenuously opposed by Major Farrel, who represented
the imprudence of taking such a step before he had secured a proper
protection from the consequences with which it might be attended.

“It is not,” said he, “your own life and fortune only which depend upon
your behaviour in this emergency, but also the quiet and happiness of
those who are most dear to your affection. Not you alone, but likewise
your mother and sister, would infallibly suffer by your temerity and
precipitation. First of all, deliver your credentials at court, and let
us join our endeavours to raise an interest strong enough to
counterbalance that of Trebasi. If we succeed, there will be no
necessity for having recourse to personal measures. He will be
compelled to yield up your inheritance which he unjustly detains, and
to restore your sister to your arms; and if he afterwards refuses to do
justice to the Countess, you will always have it in your power to
evince yourself the son of the brave Count de Melvil.”

These just and salutary representations had a due effect upon Renaldo,
who no sooner arrived at the capital of Austria, than he waited upon a
certain prince of distinction, to whose patronage he was commended; and
from whom he met with a very cordial reception, not only on account of
his credentials, but also for the sake of his father, who was well
known to his highness. He heard his complaints with great patience and
affability, assured him of his assistance and protection, and even
undertook to introduce him to the empress-queen, who would not suffer
the weakest of her subjects to be oppressed, much less disregard the
cause of an injured young nobleman, who, by his own services, and those
of his family, was peculiarly entitled to her favour.

Nor was he the only person whose countenance and patronage Melvil
solicited upon this occasion; he visited all the friends of his father,
and all his mother’s relations, who were easily interested in his
behalf; while Major Farrel contributed all his efforts in strengthening
the association. So that a lawsuit was immediately commenced against
Count Trebasi, who on his side was not idle, but prepared with
incredible industry for the assault, resolving to maintain with his
whole power the acquisition he had made.

The laws of Hungary, like those of some other countries I could name,
afford so many subterfuges for the purposes of perfidy and fraud, that
it is no wonder our youth began to complain of the slow progress of his
affair; especially as he glowed with the most eager desire of
redressing the grievances of his parent and sister, whose sufferings he
did not doubt were doubled since the institution of his process against
their tormentor. He imparted his sentiments on this head to his friend;
and, as his apprehensions every moment increased, plainly told him he
could no longer live without making some effort to see those with whom
he was so nearly connected in point of blood and affection. He
therefore resolved to repair immediately to Presburg; and, according to
the intelligence he should procure, essay to see and converse with his
mother, though at the hazard of his life.




CHAPTER FIFTY-EIGHT

RENALDO ABRIDGES THE PROCEEDINGS AT LAW, AND APPROVES HIMSELF THE SON
OF HIS FATHER.


The Major, finding him determined, insisted upon attending him in this
expedition, and they set out together for Presburg, where they
privately arrived in the dark, resolving to keep themselves concealed
at the house of a friend, until they should have formed some plan for
their future operations. Here they were informed that Count Trebasi’s
castle was altogether inaccessible; that all the servants who were
supposed to have the least veneration or compassion for the Countess
were dismissed; and that, since Renaldo was known to be in Germany, the
vigilance and caution of that cruel husband was redoubled to such a
degree, that nobody knew whether his unfortunate lady was actually
alive or dead.

Farrel perceiving Melvil exceedingly affected with this intimation, and
hearing him declare that he would never quit Presburg until he should
have entered the house, and removed his doubts on that interesting
subject, not only argued with great vehemence against such an attempt,
as equally dangerous and indiscreet, but solemnly swore he would
prevent his purpose, by discovering his design to the family, unless he
would promise to listen to a more moderate and feasible expedient. He
then proposed that he himself should appear in the equipage of one of
the travelling Savoyards who stroll about Europe, amusing ignorant
people with the effects of a magic lanthorn, and in that disguise
endeavour to obtain admittance from the servants of Trebasi, among whom
he might make such inquiries as would deliver Melvil from his present
uneasy suspense.

This proposal was embraced, though reluctantly, by Renaldo, who was
unwilling to expose his friend to the least danger or disgrace; and the
Major being next day provided with the habit and implements of his new
profession, together with a ragged attendant who preceded him,
extorting music from a paltry viol, approached the castle gate, and
proclaimed his show so naturally in a yell, partaking of the scream of
Savoy and the howl of Ireland, that one would have imagined he had been
conductor to Madam Catherina from his cradle. So far his stratagem
succeeded; he had not long stood in waiting before he was invited into
the court-yard, where the servants formed a ring, and danced to the
efforts of his companion’s skill; then he was conducted into the
buttery, where he exhibited his figures on the wall, and his princess
on the floor; and while they regaled him in this manner with scraps and
sour wine, he took occasion to inquire about the old lady and her
daughter, before whom he said he had performed in his last
peregrination. Though this question was asked with all that air of
simplicity which is peculiar to these people, one of the domestics took
the alarm, being infected with the suspicions of his master, and
plainly taxed the Major with being a spy, threatening at the same time
that he should be stripped and searched.

This would have been a very dangerous experiment for the Hibernian, who
had actually in his pocket a letter to the Countess from her son, which
he hoped fortune might have furnished him with an opportunity to
deliver. When he therefore found himself in this dilemma, he was not at
all easy in his own mind. However, instead of protesting his innocence
in an humble and beseeching strain, in order to acquit himself of the
charge, he resolved to elude the suspicion by provoking the wrath of
his accuser, and, putting on the air of vulgar integrity affronted,
began to reproach the servant in very insolent terms for his unfair
supposition, and undressed himself in a moment to the skin, threw his
tattered garments in the face of his adversary, telling him he would
find nothing there which he would not be very glad to part with; at the
same time raising his voice, he, in the gibberish of the clan he
represented, scolded and cursed with great fluency, so that the whole
house resounded with the noise. The valet’s jealousy, like a smaller
fire, was in a trice swallowed up in the greater flame of his rage
enkindled by this abrupt address. In consequence of which, Farrel was
kicked out at the gate, naked as he was to the waist, after his
lanthorn had been broke to pieces on his head; and there he was joined
by his domestic, who had not been able to recover his apparel and
effect a retreat, without incurring marks of the same sort of
distinction.

The Major, considering the risk he must have run in being detected,
thought himself cheaply quit for this moderate discipline, though he
was really concerned for his friend Renaldo, who, understanding the
particulars of the adventure, determined, as the last effort, to ride
round the castle in the open day, on pretence of taking the air, when,
peradventure, the Countess would see him from the place of her
confinement, and favour him with some mark or token of her being alive.

Though his companion did not much relish this plan, which he foresaw
would expose him to the insults of Trebasi, yet, as he could not
contrive a better, he acquiesced in Renaldo’s invention, with the
proviso that he would defer the execution of it until his father-in-law
should be absent in the chase, which was a diversion he every day
enjoyed.

Accordingly they set a proper watch, and lay concealed until they were
informed of Trebasi’s having gone forth; when they mounted their
horses, and rode into the neighbourhood of the castle. Having made a
small excursion in the adjoining fields, they drew nearer the walls,
and at an easy pace had twice circled them, when Farrel descried, at
the top of a tower, a white handkerchief waved by a woman’s hand
through the iron bars that secured the window. This signal being
pointed out to Renaldo, his heart began to throb with great violence;
he made a respectful obeisance towards the part in which it appeared,
and perceiving the hand beckoning him to approach, advanced to the very
buttress of the turret; upon which, seeing something drop, he alighted
with great expedition, and took up a picture of his father in
miniature, the features of which he no sooner distinguished, than the
tears ran down his cheeks; he pressed the little image to his lips with
the most filial fervour; then conveying it to his bosom, looked up to
the hand, which waved in such a manner as gave him to understand it was
high time to retire. Being by this time highly persuaded that his kind
monitor was no other than the Countess herself, he pointed to his
heart, in token of his filial affection, and laying his hand on his
sword, to denote his resolution of doing her justice, he took his leave
with another profound bow, and suffered himself to be reconducted to
his lodging.

Every circumstance of this transaction was observed by the servants of
Count Trebasi, who immediately despatched a messenger to their lord,
with an account of what had happened. Alarmed at this information, from
which he immediately concluded that the stranger was young Melvil, he
forthwith quitted the chase, and returning to the castle by a private
postern, ordered his horse to be kept ready saddled, in hope that his
son-in-law would repeat the visit to his mother. This precaution would
have been to no purpose, had Renaldo followed the advice of Farrel, who
represented the danger of returning to a place where the alarm was
undoubtedly given by his first appearance; and exhorted him to return
to Vienna for the prosecution of his suit, now that he was satisfied of
his mother’s being alive. In order to strengthen this admonition, he
bade him recollect the signal for withdrawing, which was doubtless the
effect of maternal concern, inspired by the knowledge of the Count’s
vigilance and vindictive disposition.

Notwithstanding these suggestions, Melvil persisted in his resolution
of appearing once more below the tower, on the supposition that his
mother, in expectation of his return, had prepared a billet for his
acceptance, from which he might obtain important intelligence. The
Major, seeing him lend a deaf ear to his remonstrances, was contented
to attend him in his second expedition, which he pressed him to
undertake that same afternoon, as Trebasi had taken care to circulate a
report of his having gone to dine at the seat of a nobleman in the
neighbourhood. Our knight-errant and his squire, deceived by this
finesse, presented themselves again under the prison of the Countess,
who no sooner beheld her son return, than she earnestly entreated him
to be gone, by the same sign which she had before used; and he, taking
it for granted that she was debarred the use of pen, ink, and paper,
and that she had nothing more to expect, consented to retire, and had
already moved to some distance from the house, when, in crossing a
small plantation that belonged to the castle, they were met by Count
Trebasi and another person on horseback.

At sight of this apparition, the blood mounted into Renaldo’s cheeks,
and his eyes began to lighten with eagerness and indignation; which was
not at all diminished by the ferocious address of the Count, who
advancing to Melvil, with a menacing air. “Before you proceed,” said
he, “I must know with what view you have been twice to-day patroling
round my enclosures, and reconnoitring the different avenues of my
house. You likewise carry on a clandestine correspondence with some
person in the family, of which my honour obliges me to demand an
explanation.”

“Had your actions been always regulated by the dictates of honour,”
replied Renaldo, “I should never have been questioned for riding round
that castle, which you know is my rightful inheritance; or excluded
from the sight of a parent who suffers under your tyranny and
oppression. It is my part, therefore, to expostulate; and, since
fortune hath favoured me with an opportunity of revenging our wrongs in
person, we shall not part until you have learned that the family of the
Count de Melvil is not to be injured with impunity. Here is no
advantage on either side, in point of arms or number; you are better
mounted than I am, and shall have the choice of the ground on which our
difference ought to be brought to a speedy determination.”

Trebasi, whose courage was not of the sentimental kind, but purely
owing to his natural insensibility of danger, instead of concerting
measures coolly for the engagement, or making any verbal reply to this
defiance, drew a pistol, without the least hesitation, and fired it at
the face of Renaldo, part of whose left eyebrow was carried off by the
ball. Melvil was not slow in returning the compliment, which, as it was
deliberate, proved the more decisive. For the shot entering the Count’s
right breast, made its way to the backbone with such a shock, as struck
him to the ground; upon which the other alighted, in order to improve
the advantage he had gained.

During this transaction, Farrel had well-nigh lost his life by the
savage behaviour of Trebasi’s attendant, who had been a hussar officer,
and who, thinking it was his duty to imitate the example of his patron
on this occasion, discharged a pistol at the Major, before he had the
least intimation of his design. The Hibernian’s horse being a common
hireling, and unaccustomed to stand fire, no sooner saw the flash of
Trebasi’s pistol, than, starting aside, he happened to plunge into a
hole, and was overturned at the very instant when the hussar’s piece
went off, so that no damage ensued to his rider, who, pitching on his
feet, flew with great nimbleness to his adversary, then, laying hold on
one leg, dismounted him in a twinkling, and, seizing his throat as he
lay, would have soon despatched him without the use of firearms, had he
not been prevented by his friend Renaldo, who desired him to desist,
observing that his vengeance was already satisfied, as the Count seemed
to be in the agonies of death. The Major was loth to quit his prey, as
he thought his aggressor had acted in a treacherous manner; but
recollecting that there was no time to lose, because, in all
probability, the firing had alarmed the castle, he took his leave of
the vanquished hussar, with a couple of hearty kicks, and, mounting his
horse, followed Melvil to the house of a gentleman in the
neighbourhood, who was kinsman to the Countess, and very well disposed
to grant him a secure retreat, until the troublesome consequences of
this rencontre should be overblown.

Trebasi, though to the young gentleman he seemed speechless and
insensible, had neither lost the use of his reason nor of his tongue,
but affected that extremity, in order to avoid any further conversation
with the victor. He was one of those people who never think of death
until he knocks at the door, and then earnestly entreat him to excuse
them for the present, and be so good as to call another time. The Count
had so often escaped unhurt, in the course of his campaigns, that he
looked upon himself as invulnerable, and set all danger at defiance.
Though he had hitherto taken no care of the concerns of his soul, he
had a large fund of superstition at bottom; and, when the surgeon, who
examined his wound, declared it was mortal, all the terrors of futurity
took hold on his imagination, all the misdemeanours of his life
presented themselves in aggravated colours to his recollection.

He implored the spiritual assistance of a good priest in the
neighbourhood, who, in the discharge of his own conscience, gave him to
understand that he had little mercy to expect, unless he would, as much
as lay in his power, redress the injuries he had done to his
fellow-creatures. As nothing lay heavier upon his soul than the cruelty
and fraud he had practised upon the family of Count Melvil, he
earnestly besought this charitable clergyman to mediate his pardon with
the Countess, and at the same time desired to see Renaldo before his
death, that he might put him in possession of his paternal estate, and
solicit his forgiveness for the offence he had given.

His lady, far from waiting for the priest’s intercession, no sooner
understood the lamentable situation of her husband, and found herself
at liberty, than she hastened to his apartment, expressed the utmost
concern for his misfortune, and tended him with truly conjugal
tenderness and fidelity. Her son gladly obeyed the summons, and was
received with great civility and satisfaction by his father-in-law,
who, in presence of the judge and divers gentlemen assembled for that
purpose, renounced all right and title to the fortune he had so
unjustly usurped; disclosed the name of the convent to which
Mademoiselle de Melvil had been conveyed, dismissed all the agents of
his iniquity, and being reconciled to his son-in-law, began to prepare
himself in tranquillity for his latter end.

The Countess was overwhelmed with an excess of joy, while she embraced
her long-lost son, who had proved himself so worthy of his father. Yet
this joy was embittered, by reflecting that she was made a widow by the
hands of that darling son. For, though she knew his honour demanded the
sacrifice, she could not lay aside that regard and veneration which is
attached to the name of husband; and therefore resolved to retire into
a monastery, where she could spend the remainder of her life in
devotion, without being exposed to any intercourse which might
interfere with the delicacy of her sentiments on that subject.




CHAPTER FIFTY-NINE

HE IS THE MESSENGER OF HAPPINESS TO HIS SISTER, WHO REMOVES THE FILM
WHICH HAD LONG OBSTRUCTED HIS PENETRATION, WITH REGARD TO COUNT FATHOM.


As the most endearing affection had always subsisted between Renaldo
and his sister, he would not one moment deny himself the pleasure of
flying to her embrace, and of being the glad messenger of her
deliverance. Soon, therefore, as he understood the place of her
retreat, and had obtained a proper order to the abbess, signed by Count
Trebasi, he set out post for Vienna, still accompanied by his faithful
Hibernian, and, arriving at the convent, found the abbess and the whole
house so engrossed in making preparations for the ceremony of giving
the veil next day to a young woman who had fulfilled the term of her
probation, that he could not possibly see his sister with that leisure
and satisfaction which he had flattered himself with enjoying at this
meeting; and therefore he was fain to bridle his impatience for two
days, and keep his credentials until the hurry should be over, that
Mademoiselle might have no intimation of her good fortune, except from
his own mouth.

In order to fill up this tedious interval, he visited his friends at
court, who were rejoiced to hear the happy issue of his excursion to
Presburg; the prince, who was his particular patron, desired he would
make himself perfectly easy with regard to the death of Count Trebasi,
for he would take care to represent him in such a light to the
empress-queen, as would screen him from any danger or prosecution on
that account. His highness, moreover, appointed the following day for
performing the promise he had made of presenting him to that august
princess, and in the meantime prepossessed her so much in his favour,
that when he approached her presence, and was announced by his noble
introductor, she eyed him with a look of peculiar complacency, saying,
“I am glad to see you returned to my dominions. Your father was a
gallant officer, who served our house with equal courage and fidelity;
and as I understand you tread in his footsteps, you may depend upon my
favour and protection.”

He was so much overwhelmed with this gracious reception, that, while he
bowed in silence, the drops of gratitude trickled from his eyes; and
her imperial majesty was so well pleased with this manifestation of his
heart, that she immediately gave directions for promoting him to the
command of a troop of horse. Thus fortune seemed willing, and indeed
eager to discharge the debt she owed him for the different calamities
he had undergone. And as he looked upon the generous Hebrew to be the
sole source of his success, he did not fail to make him acquainted with
the happy effects of his recommendation and friendship, and to express,
in the warmest terms, the deep sense he had of his uncommon
benevolence, which, by the bye, was still greater, with regard to
Renaldo, than the reader as yet imagines; for he not only furnished him
with money for his present occasions, but also gave him an unlimited
credit on a banker in Vienna, to whom one of his letters was directed.

The ceremony of the nun’s admission being now performed, and the
convent restored to its former quiet, Melvil hastened thither on the
wings of brotherly affection, and presented his letter to the abbess,
who having perused the contents, by which she learned that the family
disquiets of Count Trebasi no longer subsisted, and that the bearer was
the brother of Mademoiselle, she received him with great politeness,
congratulated him on this happy event, and, begging he would excuse her
staying with him in the parlour, on pretence of business, withdrew,
saying, she would immediately send in a young lady who would console
him for her absence. In a few minutes he was joined by his sister, who,
expecting nothing less than to see Renaldo, no sooner distinguished his
features, than she shrieked aloud with surprise, and would have sunk
upon the floor, had not he supported her in his embrace.

Such a sudden apparition of her brother at any time, or in any place,
after their long separation, would have strongly affected this sensible
young lady; but to find him so abruptly in a place where she thought
herself buried from the knowledge of all her relations, occasioned such
commotions in her spirits as had well-nigh endangered her reason. For
it was not till after a considerable pause, that she could talk to him
with connexion or coherence. However, as those transports subsided,
they entered into a more deliberate and agreeable conversation; in the
course of which, he gradually informed her of what had passed at the
castle; and inexpressible was the pleasure she felt in learning that
her mother was released from captivity, herself restored to freedom,
and her brother to the possession of his inheritance, by the only means
to which she had always prayed these blessings might be owing.

As she had been treated with uncommon humanity by the abbess, she would
not consent to leave the convent until he should be ready to set out
for Presburg; so that they dined together with that good lady, and
passed the afternoon in that mutual communication with which a brother
and sister may be supposed to entertain themselves on such an occasion.
She gave him a detail of the insults and mortifications she had
suffered from the brutality of her father-in-law, and told him, that
her confinement in this monastery was owing to Trebasi having
intercepted a letter to her from Renaldo, signifying his intention to
return to the empire, in order to assert his own right, and redress his
grievances. Then turning the discourse upon the incidents of his
peregrinations, she in a particular manner inquired about that
exquisite beauty who had been the innocent source of all his
distresses, and upon whose perfections he had often, in his letters to
his sister, expatiated with indications of rapture and delight.

This inquiry in a moment blew up that scorching flame which had been
well-nigh stifled by other necessary avocations. His eyes gleamed, his
cheeks glowed and grew pale alternately, and his whole frame underwent
an immediate agitation; which being perceived by Mademoiselle, she
concluded that some new calamity was annexed to the name of Monimia,
and, dreading to rip up a wound which she saw was so ineffectually
closed, she for the present suppressed her curiosity and concern, and
industriously endeavoured to introduce some less affecting subject of
conversation. He saw her aim, approved of her discretion, and, joining
her endeavours, expressed his surprise at her having omitted to signify
the least remembrance of her old favourite, Fathom, whom he had left in
England. He had no sooner pronounced this name, than she suffered some
confusion in her turn; from which, however, recollecting herself,
“Brother,” said she, “you must endeavour to forget that wretch, who is
altogether unworthy of retaining the smallest share of your regard.”

Astonished, and indeed angry, at this expression, which he considered
as the effect of malicious misrepresentation, he gently chid her for
her credulity in believing the envious aspersion of some person, who
repined at the superior virtue of Fathom, whom he affirmed to be an
honour to the human species.

“Nothing is more easy,” replied the young lady, “than to impose upon a
person, who, being himself unconscious of guile, suspects no deceit.
You have been a dupe, dear brother, not to the finesse of Fathom, but
to the sincerity of your own heart. For my own part, I assume no honour
to my own penetration in having comprehended the villany of that
impostor, which was discovered, in more than one instance, by accidents
I could not possibly foresee.

“You must know, that Teresa, who attended me from my childhood, and in
whose honesty I reposed such confidence, having disobliged some of the
inferior servants, was so narrowly watched in all her transactions, as
to be at last detected in the very act of conveying a piece of plate,
which was actually found concealed among her clothes.

“You may guess how much I was astonished when I understood this
circumstance. I could not trust to the evidence of my own senses, and
should have still believed her innocent, in spite of ocular
demonstration, had not she, in the terrors of being tried for felony,
promised to make a very material discovery to the Countess, provided
she would take such measures as would save her life.

“This request being complied with, she, in my hearing, opened up such
an amazing scene of iniquity, baseness, and ingratitude, which had been
acted by her and Fathom, in order to defraud the family to which they
were so much indebted, that I could not have believed the human mind
capable of such degeneracy, or that traitor endowed with such
pernicious cunning and dissimulation, had not her tale been congruous,
consistent, and distinct, and fraught with circumstances that left no
room to doubt the least article of her confession; on consideration of
which she was permitted to go into voluntary exile.”

She then explained their combination in all the particulars, as we have
already recounted them in their proper place, and finally observed,
that the opinion she had hence conceived of Fathom’s character, was
confirmed by what she had since learned of his perfidious conduct
towards that very nun who had lately taken the veil.

Perceiving her brother struck dumb with astonishment, and gaping with
the most eager attention, she proceeded to relate the incidents of his
double intrigue with the jeweller’s wife and daughter, as they were
communicated to her by the nun, who was no other than the individual
Wilhelmina. After those rivals had been forsaken by their gallant,
their mutual animosities and chagrin served to whet the attention and
invention of each; so that in a little time the whole mystery stood
disclosed to both. The mother had discovered the daughter’s
correspondence with Fathom, as we have formerly observed, by means of
that unfortunate letter which he unwittingly committed to the charge of
the old beldame; and, as soon as she understood he was without the
reach of all solicitation or prosecution, imparted this billet to her
husband, whose fury was so ungovernable, that he had almost sacrificed
Wilhelmina with his own hands, especially when, terrified by his
threats and imprecations, she owned that she had bestowed the chain on
this perfidious lover. However, this dreadful purpose was prevented,
partly by the interposition of his wife, whose aim was not the death
but immurement of his daughter, and partly by the tears and
supplication of the young gentlewoman herself, who protested, that,
although the ceremony of the church had not been performed, she was
contracted to Fathom by the most solemn vows, to witness which he
invoked all the saints in heaven.

The jeweller, upon cooler consideration, was unwilling to lose the last
spark of hope that glittered among the ruins of his despair, and
resisted all the importunities of his wife, who pressed him to consult
the welfare of his daughter’s soul, in the fond expectation of finding
some expedient to lure back the chain and its possessor. In the
meantime Wilhelmina was daily and hourly exposed to the mortifying
animadversions of her mamma, who, with all the insolence of virtue,
incessantly upbraided her with the backslidings of her vicious life,
and exhorted her to reformation and repentance. This continual triumph
lasted for many months, till at length, a quarrel happening between the
mother and the gossip at whose house she used to give the rendezvous to
her admirers, that incensed confidante, in the precipitation of her
anger, promulgated the history of those secret meetings; and, among the
rest, her interviews with Fathom were brought to light.

The first people who hear news of this sort are generally those to whom
they are most unwelcome. The German was soon apprised of his wife’s
frailty, and considered the two females of his house as a couple of
devils incarnate, sent from hell to exercise his patience. Yet, in the
midst of his displeasure, he found matter of consolation, in being
furnished with a sufficient reason for parting with his helpmate, who
had for many years kept his family in disquiet. He therefore, without
hazarding a personal conference, sent proposals to her by a friend,
which she did not think proper to reject; and seeing himself restored
to the dominion of his own house, exerted his sway so tyrannically,
that Wilhelmina became weary of her life, and had recourse to the
comforts of religion, of which she soon became enamoured, and begged
her father’s permission to dedicate the rest of her life to the duties
of devotion. She was accordingly received in this convent, the
regulations of which were so much to her liking, that she performed the
task of probation with pleasure, and voluntarily excluded herself from
the vanities of this life. It was here she had contracted an
acquaintance with Mademoiselle de Melvil, to whom she communicated her
complaints of Fathom, on the supposition that he was related to the
Count, as he himself had often declared.

While the young lady rehearsed the particulars of this detail, Renaldo
sustained a strange vicissitude of different passions. Surprise,
sorrow, fear, hope, and indignation raised a most tumultuous conflict
in his bosom. Monimia rushed upon his imagination in the character of
innocence betrayed by the insinuations of treachery. He with horror
viewed her at the mercy of a villain, who had broken all the ties of
gratitude and honour.

Affrighted at the prospect, he started from his seat, exclaiming, in
the most unconnected strain of distraction and despair, “Have I then
nourished a serpent in my bosom! Have I listened to the voice of a
traitor, who hath murdered my peace! who hath torn my heart-strings
asunder, and perhaps ruined the pattern of all earthly perfection. It
cannot be. Heaven would not suffer such infernal artifice to take
effect. The thunder would be levelled against the head of the accursed
projector.”

From this transport, compared with his agitation when he mentioned
Monimia, his sister judged that Fathom had been the occasion of a
breach between the two lovers; and this conjecture being confirmed by
the disjointed answers he made to her interrogations upon the affair,
she endeavoured to calm his apprehensions, by representing that he
would soon have an opportunity of returning to England, where the
misunderstanding might be easily cleared up; and that, in the meantime,
he had nothing to fear on account of the person of his mistress, in a
country where individuals were so well protected by the laws and
constitution of the realm. At length he suffered himself to be
flattered with the fond hope of seeing Monimia’s character triumph in
the inquiry, of retrieving that lost jewel, and of renewing that
ravishing intercourse and exalted expectation which had been so cruelly
cut off. He now wished to find Fathom as black as he had been
exhibited, that Monimia’s apostasy might be numbered among the
misrepresentations of his treachery and fraud.

His love, which was alike generous and ardent, espoused the cause, and
he no longer doubted her constancy and virtue. But when he reflected
how her tender heart must have been wrung with anguish at his
unkindness and cruelty, in leaving her destitute in a foreign land; how
her sensibility must have been tortured in finding herself altogether
dependent upon a ruffian, who certainly harboured the most baleful
designs upon her honour; how her life must be endangered both by his
barbarity and her own despair—I say, when he reflected on these
circumstances, he shuddered with horror and dismay; and that very night
despatched a letter to his friend the Jew, entreating him, in the most
pressing manner, to employ all his intelligence in learning the
situation of the fair orphan, that she might be protected from the
villany of Fathom, until his return to England.




CHAPTER SIXTY

HE RECOMPENSES THE ATTACHMENT OF HIS FRIEND; AND RECEIVES A LETTER THAT
REDUCES HIM TO THE VERGE OF DEATH AND DISTRACTION.


This step being taken, his mind in some measure retrieved its former
tranquillity. He soothed himself with the prospect of a happy
reconciliation with the divine Monimia, and his fancy was decoyed from
every disagreeable presage by the entertaining conversation of his
sister, with whom in two days he set out for Presburg, attended by his
friend the Major, who had never quitted him since their meeting at
Brussels. Here they found Count Trebasi entirely rid of the fever which
had been occasioned by his wound, and in a fair way of doing well; a
circumstance that afforded unspeakable pleasure to Melvil, whose manner
of thinking was such, as would have made him unhappy, could he have
charged himself with the death of his mother’s husband, howsoever
criminal he might have been.

The Count’s ferocity did not return with his health. His eyes were
opened by the danger he had incurred, and his sentiments turned in a
new channel. He heartily asked pardon of Mademoiselle for the rigorous
usage she had suffered from the violence of his temper; thanked Renaldo
for the seasonable lesson he had administered to him; and not only
insisted upon being removed from the castle to a house of his own in
Presburg, but proffered to make immediate restitution of all the rents
which he had unjustly converted to his own use.

These things being settled in the most amicable manner, to the entire
satisfaction of the parties concerned, as well as of the neighbouring
noblesse, among whom the house of Melvil was in universal esteem,
Renaldo resolved to solicit leave at the Imperial court to return to
England, in order to investigate that affair of Monimia, which was more
interesting than all the points he had hitherto adjusted. But, before
he quitted Presburg, his friend Farrel taking him aside one day,
“Count,” said he, “will you give me leave to ask, if, by my zeal and
attachment for you, I have had the good fortune to acquire your
esteem?” “To doubt that esteem,” replied Renaldo, “were to suspect my
gratitude and honour, of which I must be utterly destitute before I
lose the sense of those obligations I owe to your gallantry and
friendship—obligations which I long for a proper occasion to repay.”

“Well then,” resumed the Major, “I will deal with you like a downright
Swiss, and point out a method by which you may shift the load of
obligation from your own shoulders to mine. You know my birth, rank,
and expectations in the service; but perhaps you do not know, that, as
my expense has always unavoidably exceeded my income, I find myself a
little out at elbows in my circumstances, and want to piece them up by
matrimony. Of those ladies with whom I think I have any chance of
succeeding, Mademoiselle de Melvil seems the best qualified to render
my situation happy in all respects. Her fortune is more than sufficient
to disembarrass my affairs; her good sense will be a seasonable check
upon my vivacity; her agreeable accomplishments will engage a
continuation of affection and regard. I know my own disposition well
enough to think I shall become a most dutiful and tractable husband;
and shall deem myself highly honoured in being more closely united to
my dear Count de Melvil, the son and representative of that worthy
officer under whom my youth was formed. If you will therefore sanction
my claim, I will forthwith begin my approaches, and doubt not, under
your auspices, to bring the place to a capitulation.”

Renaldo was pleased with the frankness of this declaration, approved of
his demand, and desired him to depend upon his good offices with his
sister, whom he sounded that same evening upon the subject,
recommending the Major to her favour, as a gentleman well worthy of her
choice. Mademoiselle, who had never been exercised in the coquetries of
her sex, and was now arrived at those years when the vanity of youth
ought to yield to discretion, considered the proposal as a philosopher,
and after due deliberation candidly owned she had no objection to the
match. Farrel was accordingly introduced in the character of a lover,
after the permission of the Countess had been obtained; and he carried
on his addresses in the usual form, so much to the satisfaction of all
concerned in the event, that a day was appointed for the celebration of
his nuptials, when he entered into peaceable possession of his prize.

A few days after this joyful occasion, while Renaldo was at Vienna,
where he had been indulged with leave of absence for six months, and
employed in making preparations for his journey to Britain, he was one
evening presented by his servant with a package from London, which he
no sooner opened, than he found enclosed a letter directed to him, in
the handwriting of Monimia. He was so much affected at sight of those
well-known characters, that he stood motionless as a statue, eager to
know the contents, yet afraid to peruse the billet. While he hesitated
in this suspense, he chanced to cast his eye on the inside of the
cover, and perceived the name of his Jewish friend at the bottom of a
few lines, importing, that the enclosed was delivered to him by a
physician of his acquaintance, who had recommended it in a particular
manner to his care. This intimation served only to increase the
mystery, and whet his impatience; and as he had the explanation in his
hand, he summoned all his resolution to his aid, and, breaking the
seal, began to read these words: “Renaldo will not suppose that this
address proceeds from interested motives, when he learns, that, before
it can be presented to his view, the unfortunate Monimia will be no
more.”

Here the light forsook Renaldo’s eyes, his knees knocked together, and
he fell at full length insensible on the floor. His valet, hearing the
noise, ran into the apartment, lifted him upon a couch, and despatched
a messenger for proper assistance, while he himself endeavoured to
recall his spirits by such applications as chance afforded. But before
the Count exhibited any signs of life, his brother-in-law entered his
chamber by accident, and as soon as he recollected himself from the
extreme confusion and concern produced by this melancholy spectacle, he
perceived the fatal epistle, which Melvil, though insensible, still
kept within his grasp; justly suspecting this to be the cause of that
severe paroxysm, he drew near the couch, and with difficulty read what
is above rehearsed, and the sequel, to this effect:—

“Yes, I have taken such measures as will prevent it from falling into
your hands, until after I shall have been released from a being
embittered with inexpressible misery and anguish. It is not my
intention, once loved, and ah! still too fondly remembered youth, to
upbraid you as the source of that unceasing woe which hath been so long
the sole inhabitant of my lonely bosom. I will not call you inconstant
or unkind. I dare not think you base or dishonourable; yet I was
abruptly sacrificed to a triumphant rival, before I had learned to bear
such mortification; before I had overcome the prejudices which I had
imbibed in my father’s house. I was all at once abandoned to despair,
to indigence, and distress, to the vile practices of a villain, who, I
fear, hath betrayed us both. What have not I suffered from the insults
and vicious designs of that wretch, whom you cherished in your bosom!
Yet to these I owe this near approach to that goal of peace, where the
canker-worm of sorrow will expire. Beware of that artful traitor; and,
oh! endeavour to overcome that levity of disposition, which, if
indulged, will not only stain your reputation, but also debauch the
good qualities of your heart. I release you, in the sight of Heaven,
from all obligations. If I have been injured, let not my wrongs be
visited on the head of Renaldo, for whom shall be offered up the last
fervent prayers of the hapless Monimia.”

This letter was a clue to the labyrinth of Melvil’s distress. Though
the Major had never heard him mention the name of this beauty, he had
received such hints from his own wife, as enabled him to comprehend the
whole of the Count’s disaster. By the administration of stimulating
medicines, Renaldo recovered his perception; but this was a cruel
alternative, considering the situation of his thoughts. The first word
he pronounced was Monimia, with all the emphasis of the most violent
despair. He perused the letter, and poured forth incoherent execrations
against Fathom and himself. He exclaimed, in a frantic tone, “She is
lost for ever! murdered by my unkindness! We are both undone by the
infernal arts of Fathom! execrable monster! Restore her to my arms. If
thou art not a fiend in reality, I will tear out thy false heart.”

So saying, he sprung upon his valet, who would have fallen a sacrifice
to his undistinguishing fury, had not he been saved by the
interposition of Farrel and the family, who disengaged him from his
master’s gripe by dint of force; yet, notwithstanding their joint
endeavours, he broke from this restraint, leaped upon the floor, and
seizing his sword, attempted to plunge it in his own breast. When he
was once more overcome by numbers, he cursed himself, and all those who
withheld him; swore he would not survive the fair victim who had
perished by his credulity and indiscretion; and the agitation of his
spirits increased to such a degree, that he was seized with strong
convulsions, which nature was scarce able to sustain. Every medical
expedient was used to quiet his perturbation, which at length yielded
so far as to subside into a continual fever and confirmed delirium,
during which he ceased not to pour forth the most pathetic complaints,
touching his ruined love, and to rave about the ill-starred Monimia.
The Major, half distracted by the calamity of his friend, would have
concealed it from the knowledge of his family, had not the physician,
by despairing of his life, laid him under the necessity of making them
acquainted with his condition.

The Countess and Mrs. Farrel were no sooner informed of his case than
they hastened to the melancholy scene, where they found Renaldo
deprived of his senses, panting under the rage of an exasperated
disease. They saw his face distorted, and his eyes glaring with frenzy;
they heard him invoke the name of Monimia with a tenderness of accent
which even the impulse of madness could not destroy. Then, with a
sudden transition of tone and gesture, he denounced vengeance against
her betrayer, and called upon the north wind to cool the fervour of his
brain. His hair hung in dishevelled parcels, his cheeks were wan, his
looks ghastly, his vigour was fled, and all the glory of his youth
faded; the physician hung his head in silence, the attendants wrung
their hands in despair, and the countenance of his friend was bathed in
tears.

Such a picture would have moved the most obdurate heart; what
impression then must it have made upon a parent and sister, melting
with all the enthusiasm of affection! The mother was struck dumb, and
stupefied with grief; the sister threw herself on the bed in a
transport of sorrow, caught her loved Renaldo in her arms, and was,
with great difficulty, torn from his embrace. Such was the dismal
reverse that overtook the late so happy family of Melvil; such was the
extremity to which the treachery of Fathom had reduced his best
benefactor!

Three days did nature struggle with surprising efforts, and then the
constitution seemed to sink under the victorious fever; yet, as his
strength diminished, his delirium abated, and on the fifth morning he
looked round, and recognised his weeping friends. Though now exhausted
to the lowest ebb of life, he retained the perfect use of speech, and
his reason being quite unclouded, spoke to each with equal kindness and
composure; he congratulated himself upon the sight of shore after the
horrors of such a tempest; called upon the Countess and his sister, who
were not permitted to see him at such a conjuncture; and being apprised
by the Major of his reason for excluding them from his presence, he
applauded his concern, bequeathed them to his future care, and took
leave of that gentleman with a cordial embrace. Then he desired to be
left in private with a certain clergyman, who regulated the concerns of
his soul, and he being dismissed, turned his face from the light, in
expectation of his final discharge. In a few minutes all was still and
dreary, he was no longer heard to breathe, no more the stream of life
was perceived to circulate, he was supposed to be absolved from all his
cares, and an universal groan from the bystanders announced the decease
of the gallant, generous, and tender-hearted Renaldo.

“Come hither, ye whom the pride of youth and health, of birth and
affluence inflames, who tread the flowery maze of pleasure, trusting to
the fruition of ever-circling joys; ye who glory in your
accomplishments, who indulge the views of ambition, and lay schemes for
future happiness and grandeur, contemplate here the vanity of life!
behold how low this excellent young man is laid! mowed down even in the
blossom of his youth, when fortune seemed to open all her treasures to
his worth!”

Such were the reflections of the generous Farrel, who, while he
performed the last office of friendship, in closing the eyes of the
much-lamented Melvil, perceived a warmth on the skin, which the hand of
death seldom leaves unextinguished. This uncommon sensation he reported
to the physician, who, though he could feel no pulsation of the heart
or arteries, conjectured that life still lingered in some of its
interior haunts, and immediately ordered such applications to the
extremities and surface of the body, as might help to concentrate and
reinforce the natural heat.

By these prescriptions, which for some time produced no sensible
effect, the embers were, in all probability, kept glowing, and the
vital power revived, for, after a considerable pause, respiration was
gradually renewed at long intervals, a languid motion was perceived at
the heart, a few feeble and irregular pulsations were felt at the
wrist, the clay-coloured livery of death began to vanish from his face,
the circulation acquired new force, and he opened his eyes with a sigh,
which proclaimed his return from the shades of death.

When he recovered the faculty of swallowing, a cordial was
administered, and whether the fever abated, in consequence of the
blood’s being cooled and condensed during the recess of action in the
solids, or nature, in that agony, had prepared a proper channel for the
expulsion of the disease, certain it is, he was from this moment rid of
all bodily pain; he retrieved the animal functions, and nothing
remained of his malady but an extreme weakness and languor, the effect
of nature’s being fatigued in the battle she had won.

Unutterable was the joy that took possession of his mother and sister
when Farrel flew into her apartment to intimate this happy turn. Scarce
could they be restrained from pouring forth their transports in the
presence of Renaldo, who was still too feeble to endure such
communication; indeed, he was extremely mortified and dejected at this
event, which had diffused such pleasure and satisfaction among his
friends, for though his distemper was mastered, the fatal cause of it
still rankled at his heart, and he considered this respite from death
as a protraction of his misery.

When he was congratulated by the Major on the triumph of his
constitution, he replied, with a groan, “I would to heaven it had been
otherwise, for I am reserved for all the horrors of the most poignant
sorrow and remorse. O Monimia! Monimia! I hoped by this time to have
convinced thy gentle shade, that I was, at least intentionally,
innocent of that ruthless barbarity which hath brought thee to an
untimely grave. Heaven and earth! do I still survive the consciousness
of that dire catastrophe! and lives the atrocious villain who hath
blasted all our hopes!”

With these last words the fire darted from his eyes, and his brother,
snatching this occasional handle for reconciling him to life, joined in
his exclamations against the treacherous Fathom, and observed, that he
should not, in point of honour, wish to die, until he should have
sacrificed that traitor to the manes of the beauteous Monimia. This
incitement acted as a spur upon exhausted nature, causing the blood to
circulate with fresh vigour, and encouraging him to take such
sustenance as would recruit his strength, and repair the damage which
his health had sustained.

His sister assiduously attended him in his recovery, flattering his
appetite, and amusing his sorrow at the same time; the clergyman
assailed his despondence with religious weapons, as well as with
arguments drawn from philosophy; and the fury of his passions being
already expended, he became so tractable as to listen to his
remonstrances. But notwithstanding the joint endeavours of all his
friends, a deep fixed melancholy remained after every consequence of
his disease had vanished. In vain they essayed to elude his grief by
gaiety and diversions, in vain they tried to decoy his heart into some
new engagement.

These kind attempts served only to feed and nourish that melancholy
which pined within his bosom. Monimia still haunted him in the midst of
these amusements, while his reflection whispered to him, “Pleasures
like these I might have relished with her participation.” That darling
idea mingled in all the female assemblies at which he was present,
eclipsing their attractions, and enhancing the bitterness of his loss;
for absence, enthusiasm, and even his despair had heightened the charms
of the fair orphan into something supernatural and divine.

Time, that commonly weakens the traces of remembrance, seemed to deepen
its impressions in his breast; nightly, in his dreams, did he converse
with his dear Monimia, sometimes on the verdant bank of a delightful
stream, where he breathed, in soft murmurs, the dictates of his love
and admiration; sometimes reclined within the tufted grove, his arm
encircled and sustained her snowy neck, whilst she, with looks of love
ineffable, gazed on his face, invoking Heaven to bless her husband and
her lord. Yet, even in these illusions was his fancy oft alarmed for
the ill-fated fair. Sometimes he viewed her tottering on the brink of a
steep precipice, far distant from his helping hand; at other times she
seemed to sail along the boisterous tide, imploring his assistance,
then would he start with horror from his sleep, and feel his sorrows
more than realised; he deserted his couch, he avoided the society of
mankind, he courted sequestered shades where he could indulge his
melancholy; there his mind brooded over his calamity until his
imagination became familiar with all the ravages of death; it
contemplated the gradual decline of Monimia’s health, her tears, her
distress, her despair at his imagined cruelty; he saw, through that
perspective, every blossom of her beauty wither, every sparkle vanish
from her eyes; he beheld her faded lips, her pale cheek, and her
inanimated features, the symmetry of which not death itself was able to
destroy. His fancy conveyed her breathless corse to the cold grave,
o’er which, perhaps, no tear humane was shed, where her delicate limbs
were consigned to dust, where she was dished out a delicious banquet to
the unsparing worm.

Over these pictures he dwelt with a sort of pleasing anguish, until he
became so enamoured of her tomb, that he could no longer resist the
desire that compelled him to make a pilgrimage to the dear hallowed
spot, where all his once gay hopes lay buried; that he might nightly
visit the silent habitation of his ruined love, embrace the sacred
earth with which she was now compounded, moisten it with his tears, and
bid the turf lie easy on her breast. Besides the prospect of this
gloomy enjoyment, he was urged to return to England, by an eager desire
of taking vengeance on the perfidious Fathom, as well as of acquitting
himself of the obligations he owed in that kingdom, to those who had
assisted him in his distress. He therefore communicated his intention
to Farrel, who would have insisted upon attending him in the journey,
had not he been conjured to stay and manage Renaldo’s affairs in his
absence. Every previous step being taken, he took leave of the Countess
and his sister, who had, with all their interest and elocution, opposed
his design, the execution of which, they justly feared, would, instead
of dissipating, augment his chagrin; and now, seeing him determined,
they shed a flood of tears at his departure, and he set out from Vienna
in a post-chaise, accompanied by a trusty valet-de-chambre on
horseback.




CHAPTER SIXTY-ONE

RENALDO MEETS WITH A LIVING MONUMENT OF JUSTICE, AND ENCOUNTERS A
PERSONAGE OF SOME NOTE IN THESE MEMOIRS.


As this domestic was very well qualified for making all the proper
dispositions, and adjusting every necessary article on the road,
Renaldo totally abstracted himself from earthly considerations, and
mused without ceasing on that theme which was the constant subject of
his contemplation. He was blind to the objects that surrounded him; he
scarce ever felt the importunities of nature; and had not they been
reinforced by the pressing entreaties of his attendant, he would have
proceeded without refreshment or repose. In this absence of mind did he
traverse a great part of Germany, in his way to the Austrian
Netherlands, and arrived at the fortress of Luxemburg, where he was
obliged to tarry a whole day on account of an accident which had
happened to his chaise. Here he went to view the fortifications; and as
he walked along the ramparts, his ears were saluted with these words:
“Heaven bless the noble Count de Melvil! will not he turn the eyes of
compassion on an old fellow-soldier reduced to misfortune and
disgrace?”

Surprised at this address, which was attended with the clanking of
chains, Renaldo lifted up his eyes, and perceived the person who spoke
to be one of two malefactors shackled together, who had been sentenced
for some crime to work as labourers on the fortifications. His face was
so covered with hair, and his whole appearance so disguised by the
squalid habit which he wore, that the Count could not recollect his
features, until he gave him to understand that his name was Ratchcali.
Melvil immediately recognised his fellow-student at Vienna, and his
brother-volunteer upon the Rhine, and expressed equal surprise and
concern at seeing him in such a deplorable situation.

Nothing renders the soul so callous and insensible as the searing
brands of infamy and disgrace. Without betraying the least symptoms of
shame or confusion, “Count,” says he, “this is the fate of war, at
least of the war in which I have been engaged, ever since I took leave
of the Imperial army, and retreated with your old companion Fathom.
Long life to that original genius! If he is not unhappily eclipsed by
some unfortunate interposition, before his terrene parts are purified,
I foresee that he will shine a star of the first magnitude in the world
of adventure.”

At mention of this detested name, Renaldo’s heart began to throb with
indignation; yet he suppressed the emotion, and desired to know the
meaning of that splendid encomium which he had bestowed upon his
confederate. “It would be quite unnecessary,” replied Ratchcali, “for a
man in my present situation to equivocate or disguise the truth. The
nature of my disgrace is perfectly well known. I am condemned to hard
labour for life; and unless some lucky accident, which I cannot now
foresee, shall intervene, all I can expect is some alleviation of my
hard lot from the generosity of such gentlemen as you, who
compassionate the sufferings of your fellow-creatures. In order to
engage your benevolence the more in my behalf, I shall, if you will
give me the hearing, faithfully inform you of some particulars, which
it may import you to know, concerning my old acquaintance Ferdinand
Count Fathom, whose real character hath perhaps hitherto escaped your
notice.”

Then he proceeded to give a regular detail of all the strokes of
finesse which he, in conjunction with our adventurer, had practised
upon Melvil and others, during their residence at Vienna, and the
campaigns they had made upon the Rhine. He explained the nature of the
robbery which was supposed to have been done by the Count’s valet,
together with the manner of their desertion. He described his
separation from Fathom, their meeting at London, the traffic they
carried on in copartnership; and the misfortune that reduced Ferdinand
to the condition in which he was found by Melvil.

“After having gratified the honest lawyer,” said he, “with a share of
the unfortunate Fathom’s spoils, and packed up all my own valuable
effects, my new auxiliary Maurice and I posted to Harwich, embarked in
the packet-boat, and next day arrived at Helvoetsluys; from thence we
repaired to the Hague, in order to mingle in the gaieties of the place,
and exercise our talents at play, which is there cultivated with
universal eagerness. But, chancing to meet with an old acquaintance,
whom I did not at all desire to see, I found it convenient to withdraw
softly to Rotterdam; from whence we set out for Antwerp; and, having
made a tour of the Austrian Netherlands, set up our rest at Brussels,
and concerted a plan for laying the Flemings under contribution.

“From our appearance we procured admission into the most polite
assemblies, and succeeded to a wonder in all our operations; until our
career was unfortunately checked by the indiscretion of my ally, who,
being detected in the very act of conveying a card, was immediately
introduced to a magistrate. And this minister of justice was so
curious, inquisitive, and clear-sighted, that Count Maurice, finding it
impossible to elude his penetration, was fain to stipulate for his own
safety, by giving up his friend to the cognisance of the law. I was
accordingly apprehended, before I knew the cause of my arrest; and
being unhappily known by some soldiers of the Prince’s guard, my
character turned out so little to the approbation of the inquisitors,
that all my effects were confiscated for the benefit of the state, and
I was by a formal sentence condemned to labour on the fortifications
all the days of my life; while Maurice escaped at the expense of five
hundred stripes, which he received in public from the hands of the
common executioner.

“Thus have I, without evasion or mental reservation, given a faithful
account of the steps by which I have arrived at this barrier, which is
likely to be the ne plus ultra of my peregrinations, unless the
generous Count de Melvil will deign to interpose his interest in behalf
of an old fellow-soldier, who may yet live to justify his mediation.”

Renaldo had no reason to doubt the truth of this story, every
circumstance of which tended to corroborate the intelligence he had
already received touching the character of Fathom, whom he now
considered with a double portion of abhorrence, as the most abandoned
miscreant that nature had ever produced. Though Ratchcali did not
possess a much higher place in his opinion, he favoured him with marks
of his bounty, and exhorted him, if possible, to reform his heart; but
he would by no means promise to interpose his credit in favour of a
wretch self-convicted of such enormous villany and fraud. He could not
help moralising upon this rencontre, which inspired him with great
contempt for human nature. And next day he proceeded on his journey
with a heavy heart, ruminating on the perfidy of mankind, and, between
whiles, transported with the prospect of revenging all his calamities
upon the accursed author.

While he was wrapped up in these reveries, his carriage rolled along,
and had already entered a wood between Mons and Tournay, when his dream
was suddenly interrupted by the explosion of several pistols that were
fired among the thickets at a little distance from the road. Roused at
this alarm, he snatched his sword that stood by him, and springing from
the chaise, ran directly towards the spot, being close followed by his
valet, who had alighted and armed himself with a pistol in each hand.
About forty yards from the highway, they arrived in a little glade or
opening, where they saw a single man standing at bay against five
banditti, after having killed one of their companions, and lost his own
horse, that lay dead upon the ground.

Melvil seeing this odds, and immediately guessing their design, rushed
among them without hesitation, and in an instant ran his sword through
the heart of one whose hand was raised to smite the gentleman behind,
while he was engaged with the rest in front. At the same time the valet
disabled another by a shot in the shoulder; so that the number being
now equal on both sides, a furious combat ensued, every man being
paired with an antagonist, and each having recourse to swords, as all
their pieces had been discharged. Renaldo’s adversary, finding himself
pressed with equal fury and skill, retreated gradually among the trees,
until he vanished altogether into the thickest of the wood; and his two
companions followed his example with great ease, the valet-de-chambre
being hurt in the leg, and the stranger so much exhausted by the wounds
he had received before Renaldo’s interposition, that, when the young
gentleman approached to congratulate him on the defeat of the robbers,
he, in advancing to embrace his deliverer, dropped down motionless on
the grass.

The Count, with that warmth of sympathy and benevolence which was
natural to his heart, lifted up the wounded cavalier in his arms, and
carried him to the chaise, in which he was deposited, while the
valet-de-chambre reloaded his pistols, and prepared for a second
attack, as they did not doubt that the banditti would return with a
reinforcement. However, before they reappeared, Renaldo’s driver
disengaged him from the wood, and in less than a quarter of an hour
they arrived at a village, where they halted for assistance to the
stranger, who, though still alive, had not recovered the use of his
senses.

After he was undressed, and laid in a warm bed, a surgeon examined his
body, and found a wound in his neck by a sword, and another in his
right side, occasioned by a pistol-shot; so that his prognostic was
very dubious. Meanwhile, he applied proper dressings to both; and, in
half an hour after this administration, the gentleman gave some tokens
of perception. He looked around him with a wildness of fury in his
aspect, as if he had thought himself in the hands of the robbers by
whom he had been attacked. But, when he saw the assiduity with which
the bystanders exerted themselves in his behalf, one raising his head
from the pillow, while another exhorted him to swallow a little wine
which was warmed for the purpose; when he beheld the sympathising looks
of all present, and heard himself accosted in the most cordial terms by
the person whom he recollected as his deliverer, all the severity
vanished from his countenance; he took Renaldo’s hand, and pressed it
to his lips; and, while the tears gushed from his eyes, “Praised be
God,” said he, “that virtue and generosity are still to be found among
the sons of men.”

Everybody in the apartment was affected by this exclamation; and
Melvil, above all the rest, felt such emotions as he could scarcely
restrain. He entreated the gentleman to believe himself in the midst of
such friends as would effectually secure him from all violence and
mortification; he conjured him to compose the perturbation of his
spirits, and quiet the apprehensions of his mind with that reflection;
and protested, that he himself would not quit the house while his
attendance should be deemed necessary for the stranger’s cure, or his
conversation conducive to his amusement.

These assurances, considered with the heroic part which the young
Hungarian had already acted in his behalf, inspired the cavalier with
such a sublime idea of Melvil, that he gazed upon him with silent
astonishment, as an angel sent from heaven for his succour; and, in the
transport of his gratitude, could not help exclaiming, “Sure Providence
hath still something in reserve for this unfortunate wretch, in whose
favour such a miracle of courage and generosity hath interposed!”

Being accommodated with proper care and attendance, his constitution in
a little time overcame the fever; and, at the third dressing, the
surgeon declared him out of all danger from his wounds. Then was
Renaldo indulged with opportunities of conversing with the patient, and
of inquiring into the particulars of his fortune and designs in life,
with a view to manifest the inclination he felt to serve him in his
future occasions.

The more this stranger contemplated the character of the Count, the
more his amazement increased, on account of his extraordinary
benevolence in favour of a person whose merit he could not possibly
know; he even expressed his surprise on this subject to Renaldo, who at
length told him, that, although his best offices should always be ready
for the occasions of any gentleman in distress, his particular
attachment and regard to him was improved by an additional
consideration. “I am no stranger,” said he, “to the virtues and honour
of the gallant Don Diego de Zelos.”

“Heaven and earth!” cried the stranger, starting from his seat with
extreme emotion, “do I then live to hear myself addressed by that
long-lost appellation! my heart glows at the expression! my spirits are
kindled with a flame that thrills through every nerve! Say, young
gentleman, if you are really an inhabitant of earth, by what means are
you acquainted with the unhappy name of Zelos?”

In answer to this eager interrogation, Renaldo gave him to understand,
that in the course of his travels, he had resided a short time at
Seville, where he had frequently seen Don Diego, and often heard his
character mentioned with uncommon esteem and veneration. “Alas!”
replied the Castilian, “that justice is no longer done to the wretched
Zelos; his honours are blasted, and his reputation canker-bitten by the
venomous tooth of slander.”

He then proceeded to unfold his misfortunes, as they have already been
explained in the former part of these memoirs; at the recapitulation of
which, the heart of Melvil, being intendered by his own calamities, was
so deeply affected, that he re-echoed the groans of Don Diego, and wept
over his sufferings with the most filial sympathy. When he repeated the
story of that cruel fraud which was practised upon him by the faithless
Fadini, Melvil, whose mind and imagination teemed with the villanies of
Fathom, was immediately struck with the conjecture of his being the
knave; because, indeed, he could not believe that any other person was
so abandoned by principle and humanity as to take such a barbarous
advantage of a gentleman in distress.




CHAPTER SIXTY-TWO

HIS RETURN TO ENGLAND, AND MIDNIGHT PILGRIMAGE TO MONIMIA’S TOMB.


He considered the date of that unparalleled transaction, which agreed
with his conjecture, and from the inquiries he made concerning the
person of the traitor, gathered reasons sufficient to confirm his
supposition. Thus certified, “That is the villain,” cried the Count,
“whose infernal arts have overwhelmed me with such misery as Heaven
itself hath made no remedy to dispel! To revenge my wrongs on that
perfidious miscreant, is one of the chief reasons for which I deign to
drag about an hateful being. O Don Diego! what is life, when all its
enjoyments are so easily poisoned by the machinations of such a worm!”
So saying, he smote his breast in all the agony of woe, and besought
the Spaniard to relate the steps he took in consequence of this
disaster.

The Castilian’s cheeks reddened at this information, which enforced his
own resentment, and casting up his eyes to heaven, “Sacred powers!”
cried he, “let him not perish, before you bring him within my reach.
You ask me, noble cavalier, what measures I took in this abyss of
misery? For the first day, I was tortured with apprehensions for the
friendly Fadini, fearing that he had been robbed and murdered for the
jewels which he had, perhaps, too unwarily exposed to sale. But this
terror soon vanished before the true presages of my fate, when, on the
morrow, I found the whole family in tears and confusion, and heard my
landlord pour forth the most bitter imprecations against the fugitive,
who had deflowered his daughter, and even robbed the house. You will
ask, which of the passions of my heart were interested on this
occasion? they were shame and indignation. All my grief flowed in
another channel; I blushed to find my judgment deceived; I scorned to
complain; but, in my heart, denounced vengeance against my base
betrayer. I silently retired to my apartment, in order to commune with
my own thoughts.

“I had borne greater calamities without being driven to despair; I
summoned all my fortitude to my assistance, and resolved to live in
spite of affliction. Thus determined, I betook myself to the house of a
general officer, whose character was fair in the world; and having
obtained admission in consequence of my Oriental appearance, ‘To a man
of honour,’ said I, ‘the unfortunate need no introduction. My habit
proclaims me a Persian; this passport from the States of Holland will
confirm that supposition. I have been robbed of jewels to a
considerable value, by a wretch whom I favoured with my confidence; and
now, reduced to extreme indigence, I come to offer myself as a soldier
in the armies of France. I have health and strength sufficient to
discharge that duty. Nor am I unacquainted with a military life, which
was once my glory and occupation. I therefore sue for your protection,
that I may be received, though in the lowest order of them that serve
the King; and that your future favour may depend upon my behaviour in
that capacity.’

“The general, surprised at my declaration, surveyed me with uncommon
attention; he perused my certificate; asked divers questions concerning
the art of war, to which I returned such answers as convinced him that
I was not wholly ignorant in that particular. In short, I was enlisted
as a volunteer in his own regiment, and soon after promoted to the rank
of a subaltern, and the office of equerry to his own son, who, at that
time, had attained to the degree of colonel, though his age did not
exceed eighteen years.

“This young man was naturally of a ferocious disposition, which had
been rendered quite untractable by the pride of birth and fortune,
together with the licence of his education. As he did not know the
respect due to a gentleman, so he could not possibly pay it to those
who were, unfortunately, under his command. Divers mortifications I
sustained with that fortitude which became a Castilian who lay under
obligations to the father; till, at length, laying aside all decorum,
he smote me. Sacred Heaven! he smote Don Diego de Zelos, in presence of
his whole household.

“Had my sword been endowed with sensation, it would of itself have
started from its scabbard at this indignity offered to its master. I
unsheathed it without deliberation, saying, ‘Know, insolent boy, he is
a gentleman whom thou hast outraged; and thou hast thus cancelled the
ties which have hitherto restrained my indignation.’ His servants would
have interposed, but he commanded them to retire; and, flushed with
that confidence which the impetuosity of his temper inspired, he drew,
in his turn, and attacked me with redoubled rage; but his dexterity
being very unequal to his courage, he was soon disarmed, and
overthrown; when, pointing my sword to his breast, ‘In consideration of
thy youth and ignorance,’ said I, ‘I spare that life which thou hast
forfeited by thy ungenerous presumption.’

“With these words, I put up my weapon, retired through the midst of his
domestics, who, seeing their master safe, did not think proper to
oppose my passage, and, mounting my horse, in less than two hours
entered the Austrian dominions, resolving to proceed as far as Holland,
that I might embark in the first ship for Spain, in order to wash away,
with my own blood, or that of my enemies, the cruel stain which hath so
long defiled my reputation.

“This was the grievance that still corroded my heart, and rendered
ineffectual the inhuman sacrifice I had made to my injured honour. This
was the consideration that incessantly prompted, and still importunes
me to run every risk of life and fortune, rather than leave my fame
under such an ignominious aspersion. I purpose to obey this internal
call. I am apt to believe it is the voice of Heaven—of that Providence
which manifested its care by sending such a generous auxiliary to my
aid, when I was overpowered by banditti, on the very first day of my
expedition.”

Having in this manner gratified the curiosity of his deliverer, he
expressed a desire of knowing the quality of him to whom he was so
signally obliged; and Renaldo did not scruple to make the Castilian
acquainted with his name and family. He likewise communicated the story
of his unfortunate love, with all the symptoms of unutterable woe,
which drew tears from the noble-hearted Spaniard, while, with a groan,
that announced the load which overwhelmed his soul, “I had a daughter,”
said he, “such as you describe the peerless Monimia; had Heaven decreed
her for the arms of such a lover, I, who am now the most wretched,
should have been the most happy parent upon earth.”

Thus did these new friends alternately indulge their mutual sorrow, and
concert measures for their future operations. Melvil earnestly
solicited the Castilian to favour him with his company to England,
where, in all probability, both would enjoy the gloomy satisfaction of
being revenged upon their common betrayer, Fathom; and, as a farther
inducement, he assured him, that, as soon as he should have
accomplished the melancholy purposes of his voyage, he would accompany
Don Diego to Spain, and employ his whole interest and fortune in his
service. The Spaniard, thunderstruck at the extravagant generosity of
this proposal, could scarce believe the evidence of his own senses;
and, after some pause, replied, “My duty would teach me to obey any
command you should think proper to impose; but here my inclination and
interest are so agreeably flattered, that I should be equally
ungrateful and unwise, in pretending to comply with reluctance.”

This point being settled, they moved forwards to Mons, as soon as Don
Diego was in a condition to bear the shock of such a removal, and there
remaining until his wounds were perfectly cured, they hired a
post-chaise for Ostend, embarked in a vessel at that port, reached the
opposite shore of England, after a short and easy passage, and arrived
in London without having met with any sinister accident on the road.

As they approached this capital, Renaldo’s grief seemed to regurgitate
with redoubled violence. His memory was waked to the most minute and
painful exertion of its faculties; his imagination teemed with the most
afflicting images, and his impatience became so ardent, that never
lover panted more eagerly for the consummation of his wishes, than
Melvil, for an opportunity of stretching himself upon the grave of the
lost Monimia. The Castilian was astonished, as well as affected, at the
poignancy of his grief, which, as a proof of his susceptibility and
virtue, endeared him still more to his affection; and though his own
misfortunes had rendered him very unfit for the office of a comforter,
he endeavoured, by soothing discourse, to moderate the excess of his
friend’s affliction.

Though it was dark when they alighted at the inn, Melvil ordered a
coach to be called; and, being attended by the Spaniard, who would not
be persuaded to quit him upon such an occasion, he repaired to the
house of the generous Jew, whose rheum distilled very plentifully at
his approach. The Count had already acquitted himself in point of
pecuniary obligations to this benevolent Hebrew; and now, after having
made such acknowledgments as might be expected from a youth of his
disposition, he begged to know by what channel he had received that
letter which he had been so kind as to forward to Vienna.

Joshua, who was ignorant of the contents of that epistle, and saw the
young gentleman extremely moved, would have eluded his inquiry, by
pretending he had forgot the circumstance; but when he understood the
nature of the case which was not explained without the manifestation of
the utmost inquietude, he heartily condoled the desponding lover,
telling him he had in vain employed all his intelligence about that
unfortunate beauty, in consequence of Melvil’s letter to him on that
subject; and then directed him to the house of the physician, who had
brought the fatal billet which had made him miserable.

No sooner did he receive this information than he took his leave
abruptly, with promise of returning next day, and hied him to the
lodgings of that gentleman, whom he was lucky enough to find at home.
Being favoured with a private audience, “When I tell you,” said he,
“that my name is Renaldo Count de Melvil, you will know me to be the
most unfortunate of men. By that letter, which you committed to the
charge of my worthy friend Joshua, the fatal veil was removed from my
eyes, which had been so long darkened by the artifices of incredible
deceit, and my own incurable misery fully presented to my view. If you
were acquainted with the unhappy fair, who hath fallen a victim to my
mistake, you will have some idea of the insufferable pangs which I now
feel in recollecting her fate. If you have compassion for these pangs,
you will not refuse to conduct me to the spot where the dear remains of
Monimia are deposited; there let me enjoy a full banquet of woe; there
let me feast that worm of sorrow that preys upon my heart. For such
entertainment have I revisited this (to me) ill-omened isle; for this
satisfaction I intrude upon your condescension at these unseasonable
hours; for to such a degree of impatience is my affliction whetted,
that no slumber shall assail mine eyelids, no peace reside within my
bosom, until I shall have adored that earthly shrine where my Monimia
lies! Yet would I know the circumstances of her fate. Did Heaven ordain
no angel to minister to her distress? were her last moments
comfortless? ha! was not she abandoned to indigence, to insults; left
in the power of that inhuman villain who betrayed us both? Sacred
Heaven! why did Providence wink at the triumph of such consummate
perfidy?”

The physician, having listened with complacency to this effusion,
replied, “It is my profession, it is my nature to sympathise with the
afflicted. I am a judge of your feelings, because I know the value of
your loss. I attended the incomparable Monimia in her last illness, and
am well enough acquainted with her story to conclude that she fell a
sacrifice to an unhappy misunderstanding, effected and fomented by that
traitor who abused your mutual confidence.”

He then proceeded to inform him of all the particulars which we have
already recorded, touching the destiny of the beauteous orphan, and
concluded with telling him he was ready to yield him any other
satisfaction which it was in his power to grant. The circumstances of
the tale had put Renaldo’s spirits into such commotion, that he could
utter nothing but interjections and unconnected words. When Fathom’s
behaviour was described, he trembled with fierce agitation, started
from his chair, pronouncing, “Monster! fiend! but we shall one day
meet.”

When he was made acquainted with the benevolence of the French lady, he
exclaimed, “O heaven-born charity and compassion! sure that must be
some spirit of grace sent hither to mitigate the tortures of life!
where shall I find her, to offer up my thanks and adoration?” Having
heard the conclusion of the detail, he embraced the relater, as the
kind benefactor of Monimia, shed a flood of tears in his bosom, and
pressed him to crown the obligation, by conducting him to the solitary
place where now she rested from all her cares.

The gentleman perceiving the transports of his grief were such as could
not be opposed, complied with his request, attended him in the vehicle,
and directed the coachman to drive to a sequestered field, at some
distance from the city, where stood the church, within whose awful
aisle this scene was to be acted. The sexton being summoned from his
bed, produced the keys, in consequence of a gratification, after the
physician had communed with him apart, and explained the intention of
Renaldo’s visit.

During this pause the soul of Melvil was wound up to the highest pitch
of enthusiastic sorrow. The uncommon darkness of the night, the solemn
silence, and lonely situation of the place, conspired with the occasion
of his coming, and the dismal images of his fancy, to produce a real
rapture of gloomy expectation, which the whole world would not have
persuaded him to disappoint. The clock struck twelve, the owl screeched
from the ruined battlement, the door was opened by the sexton, who, by
the light of a glimmering taper, conducted the despairing lover to a
dreary aisle, and stamped upon the ground with his foot, saying, “Here
the young lady lies interred.”

Melvil no sooner received this intimation, than falling on his knees,
and pressing his lips to the hallowed earth, “Peace,” cried he, “to the
gentle tenant of this silent habitation.” Then turning to the
bystanders, with a bloodshot eye, said, “Leave me to the full enjoyment
of this occasion; my grief is too delicate to admit the company even of
my friends. The rites to be performed require privacy; adieu, then,
here must I pass the night alone.”

The doctor, alarmed at this declaration, which he was afraid imported
some resolution fatal to his own life, began to repent of having been
accessory to the visit, attempted to dissuade him from his purpose, and
finding him obstinately determined, called in the assistance of the
sexton and coachman, and solicited the aid of Don Diego, to force
Renaldo from the execution of his design.

The Castilian knowing his friend was then very unfit for common
altercation, interposed in the dispute, saying, “You need not be afraid
that he will obey the dictates of despair; his religion, his honour
will baffle such temptations; he hath promised to reserve his life for
the occasions of his friend; and he shall not be disappointed in his
present aim.” In order to corroborate this peremptory address, which
was delivered in the French language, he unsheathed his sword, and the
others retreating at sight of his weapon, “Count,” said he, “enjoy your
grief in full transport; I will screen you from interruption, though at
the hazard of my life; and while you give a loose to sorrow, within the
ghastly vault, I will watch till morning in the porch, and meditate
upon the ruin of my own family and peace.”

He accordingly prevailed upon the physician to retire, after he had
satisfied the sexton, and ordered the coachman to return by break of
day.

Renaldo, thus left alone, prostrated himself upon the grave, and poured
forth such lamentations as would have drawn tears from the most savage
hearer. He called aloud upon Monimia’s name, “Are these the nuptial
joys to which our fate hath doomed us? Is this the fruit of those
endearing hopes, that intercourse divine, that raptured admiration, in
which so many hours insensibly elapsed? where now are those attractions
to which I yielded up my captive heart? quenched are those genial eyes
that gladdened each beholder, and shone the planets of my happiness and
peace! cold! cold and withered are those lips that swelled with love,
and far outblushed the damask rose! and ah! forever silenced is that
tongue, whose eloquence had power to lull the pangs of misery and care!
no more shall my attention be ravished with the music of that voice,
which used to thrill in soft vibrations to my soul! O sainted spirit! O
unspotted shade of her whom I adored; of her whose memory I shall still
revere with ever-bleeding sorrow and regret; of her whose image will be
the last idea that forsakes this hapless bosom! now art thou conscious
of my integrity and love; now dost thou behold the anguish that I feel.
If the pure essence of thy nature will permit, wilt thou, ah! wilt thou
indulge this wretched youth with some kind signal of thy notice, with
some token of thy approbation? wilt thou assume a medium of embodied
air, in semblance of that lovely form which now lies mouldering in this
dreary tomb, and speak the words of peace to my distempered soul!
Return, Monimia, appear, though but for one short moment, to my longing
eyes! vouchsafe one smile! Renaldo will be satisfied; Renaldo’s heart
will be at rest; his grief no more will overflow its banks, but glide
with equal current to his latest hour! Alas! these are the raving of my
delirious sorrow! Monimia hears not my complaints; her soul, sublimed
far, far above all sublunary cares, enjoys that felicity of which she
was debarred on earth. In vain I stretch these eyes, environed with
darkness undistinguishing and void. No object meets my view; no sound
salutes mine ear, except the noisy wind that whistles through these
vaulted caves of death.”

In this kind of exclamation did Renaldo pass the night, not without a
certain species of woful enjoyment, which the soul is often able to
conjure up from the depths of distress; insomuch that, when the morning
intruded on his privacy, he could scarce believe it was the light of
day, so fast had fleeted the minutes of his devotion.

His heart being thus disburdened, and his impatience gratified, he
became so calm and composed, that Don Diego was equally pleased and
astonished at the air of serenity with which he came forth, and
embraced him with warm acknowledgments of his goodness and attachment.
He frankly owned, that his mind was now more at ease than he had ever
found it, since he first received the fatal intimation of his loss;
that a few such feasts would entirely moderate the keen appetite of his
sorrow, which he would afterwards feed with less precipitation.

He also imparted to the Castilian the plan of a monument, which he had
designed for the incomparable Monimia; and Don Diego was so much struck
with the description, that he solicited his advice in projecting
another, of a different nature, to be erected to the memory of his own
ill-fated wife and daughter, should he ever be able to re-establish
himself in Spain.




CHAPTER SIXTY-THREE

HE RENEWS THE RITES OF SORROW, AND IS ENTRANCED.


While they amused themselves with this sort of conversation, the
physician returned with the coach, and accompanied them back to their
inn, where he left them to their repose, after having promised to call
again at noon, and conduct Renaldo to the house of Madam Clement, the
benefactress of Monimia, to whom he eagerly desired to be introduced.

The appointment was observed with all imaginable punctuality on both
sides. Melvil had arrayed himself in a suit of deep mourning, and he
found the good lady in the like habit, assumed upon the same occasion.
The goodness of her heart was manifest in her countenance; the
sensibility of the youth discovered itself in a flood of tears, which
he shed at her appearance. His sensations were too full for utterance;
nor was she, for some time, able to give him welcome. While she led him
by the hand to a seat, the drops of sympathy rushed into either eye;
and at length she broke silence, saying, “Count, we must acquiesce in
the dispensations of Providence; and quiet the transports of our grief,
with a full assurance that Monimia is happy.”

This name was the key that unlocked the faculty of his speech. “I must
strive,” said he, “to ease the anguish of my heart with that
consolation. But say, humane, benevolent lady, to whose compassion and
generosity that hapless orphan was indebted for the last peaceful
moment she enjoyed upon earth; say, in all your acquaintance with human
nature, in all your intercourse with the daughters of men, in all the
exercise of your charity and beneficence, did you ever observe such
sweetness, purity, and truth; such beauty, sense, and perfection, as
that which was the inheritance of her whose fate I shall for ever
deplore?”—“She was, indeed,” replied the lady, “the best and fairest of
our sex.”

This was the beginning of a conversation touching that lovely victim,
in the course of which he explained those wicked arts which Fathom
practised to alienate his affections from the adorable Monimia; and she
described the cunning hints and false insinuations by which that
traitor had aspersed the unsuspecting lover, and soiled his character
in the opinion of the virtuous orphan. The intelligence he obtained on
this occasion added indignation to his grief. The whole mystery of
Monimia’s behaviour, which he could not before explain, now stood
disclosed before him. He saw the gradual progress of that infernal plan
which had been laid for their mutual ruin; and his soul was inflamed
with such desire of vengeance, that he would have taken his leave
abruptly, in order to set on foot an immediate inquiry about the
perfidious author of his wrongs, that he might exterminate such a
monster of iniquity from the face of the earth. But he was restrained
by Madam Clement, who gave him to understand, that Fathom was already
overtaken by the vengeance of Heaven; for she had traced him in all the
course of his fortune, from his first appearance in the medical sphere
to his total eclipse. She represented the villain as a wretch
altogether unworthy of his attention. She said, he was so covered with
infamy, that no person could enter the lists against him, without
bearing away some stain of dishonour; that he was, at present,
peculiarly protected by the law, and sheltered from the resentment of
Renaldo, in the cavern of his disgrace.

Melvil, glowing with rage, replied, that he was a venomous serpent,
which it was incumbent on every foot to crush; that it was the duty of
every man to contribute his whole power in freeing society from such a
pernicious hypocrite; and that, if such instances of perfidy and
ingratitude were suffered to pass with impunity, virtue and
plain-dealing would soon be expelled from the habitations of men. “Over
and above these motives,” said he, “I own myself so vitiated with the
alloy of human passion and infirmity, that I desire—I eagerly pant for
an occasion of meeting him hand to hand, where I may upbraid him with
his treachery, and shower down vengeance and destruction on his
perfidious head.”

Then he recounted the anecdotes of our adventurer which he had learned
in Germany and Flanders, and concluded with declaring his unalterable
resolution of releasing him from jail, that he might have an
opportunity of sacrificing him, with his own hand, to the manes of
Monimia. The discreet lady, perceiving the perturbation of his mind,
would not further combat the impetuosity of his passion; contenting
herself with exacting a promise, that he would not execute his purpose,
until he should have deliberated three days upon the consequences by
which a step of that kind might be attended. Before the expiration of
that term, she thought measures might be taken to prevent the young
gentleman from exposing his life or reputation to unnecessary hazard.

Having complied with her request in this particular, he took his leave,
after he had, by repeated entreaties, prevailed upon her to accept a
jewel, in token of his veneration for the kind benefactress of the
deceased Monimia; nor could his generous heart be satisfied, until he
had forced a considerable present on the humane physician who had
attended her in her last moments, and now discovered a particular
sympathy and concern for her desponding lover. This gentleman attended
him to the house of the benevolent Joshua, where they dined, and where
Don Diego was recommended, in the most fervid terms of friendship, to
the good offices of their host. Not that this duty was performed in
presence of the stranger—Renaldo’s delicacy would not expose his friend
to such a situation. While the physician, before dinner, entertained
that stranger in one apartment, Melvil withdrew into another, with the
Jew, to whom he disclosed the affair of the Castilian, with certain
circumstances, which shall, in due time, be revealed.

Joshua’s curiosity being whetted by this information, he could not help
eyeing the Spaniard at table with such a particular stare, that Don
Diego perceived his attention, and took umbrage at the freedom of his
regard. Being unable to conceal his displeasure, he addressed himself
to the Hebrew, with great solemnity, in the Spanish tongue, saving,
“Signior, is there any singularity in my appearance? or, do you
recollect the features of Don Diego de Zelos?”

“Signior Don Diego,” replied the other in pure Castilian, “I crave your
pardon for the rudeness of my curiosity, which prompted me to survey a
nobleman, whose character I revere, and to whose misfortunes I am no
stranger. Indeed, were curiosity alone concerned, I should be without
excuse; but as I am heartily inclined to serve you, as far as my weak
abilities extend, I hope your generosity will not impute any little
involuntary trespass of punctilio to my want of cordiality or esteem.”

The Spaniard was not only appeased by this apology, but also affected
with the compliment, and the language in which it was conveyed. He
thanked the Jew for his kind declaration, entreated him to bear, with
the peevishness of a disposition sore with the galling hand of
affliction; and, turning up his eyes to Heaven, “Were it possible,”
cried he, “for fate to reconcile contradictions, and recall the
irremediable current of events, I would now believe that there was
happiness still in reserve for the forlorn Zelos, now that I tread the
land of freedom and humanity, now that I find myself befriended by the
most generous of men. Alas! I ask not happiness! If, by the kind
endeavours of the gallant Count de Melvil, to whom I am already
indebted for my life, and by the efforts of his friends, the honour of
my name shall be purified and cleared from the poisonous stains of
malice by which it is at present spotted, I shall then enjoy all that
satisfaction which destiny can bestow upon a wretch whose woes are
incurable.”

Renaldo comforted him with the assurance of his being on the eve of
triumphing over his adversaries; and Joshua confirmed the consolation,
by giving him to understand, that he had correspondents in Spain of
some influence in the state; that he had already written to them on the
subject of Don Diego, in consequence of a letter which he had received
from Melvil while he tarried at Mons, and that he, every post, expected
a favourable answer on that subject.

After dinner, the physician took his leave, though not before he had
promised to meet Renaldo at night, and accompany him in the repetition
of his midnight visit to Monimia’s tomb; for this pilgrimage the
unfortunate youth resolved nightly to perform during the whole time of
his residence in England. It was, indeed, a sort of pleasure, the
prospect of which enabled him to bear the toil of living through the
day, though his patience was almost quite exhausted before the hour of
assignation arrived.

When the doctor appeared with the coach, he leaped into it with great
eagerness, after he had, with much difficulty, prevailed with Don Diego
to stay at home, on account of his health, which was not yet perfectly
established. The Castilian, however, would not comply with his request,
until he had obtained the Count’s promise, that he should be permitted
to accompany him next night, and take that duty alternately with the
physician.

About midnight, they reached the place, where they found the sexton in
waiting, according to the orders he had received. The door was opened,
the mourner conducted to the tomb, and left, as before, to the gloom of
his own meditations. Again he laid himself on the cold ground; again he
renewed his lamentable strain; his imagination began to be heated into
an ecstasy of enthusiasm, during which he again fervently invoked the
spirit of his deceased Monimia.

In the midst of these invocations, his ear was suddenly invaded with
the sound of some few solemn notes issuing from the organ, which seemed
to feel the impulse of an invisible hand.

At this awful salutation, Melvil was roused to the keenest sense of
surprise and attention. Reason shrunk before the thronging ideas of his
fancy, which represented this music as the prelude to something strange
and supernatural; and, while he waited for the sequel, the place was
suddenly illuminated, and each surrounding object brought under the
cognisance of his eye.

What passed within his mind on this occasion is not easy to be
described. All his faculties were swallowed up by those of seeing and
hearing. He had mechanically raised himself upon one knee, with his
body advancing forwards; and in this attitude he gazed with a look
through which his soul seemed eager to escape. To his view, thus
strained upon vacant space, in a few minutes appeared the figure of a
woman arrayed in white, with a veil that covered her face, and flowed
down upon her back and shoulders. The phantom approached him with an
easy step, and, lifting up her veil, discovered (believe it, O reader!)
the individual countenance of Monimia.

At sight of these well-known features, seemingly improved with new
celestial graces, the youth became a statue, expressing amazement,
love, and awful adoration. He saw the apparition smile with meek
benevolence, divine compassion, warm and intendered by that fond pure
flame which death could not extinguish. He heard the voice of his
Monimia call Renaldo! Thrice he essayed to answer; as oft his tongue
denied its office. His hair stood upright, and a cold vapour seemed to
thrill through every nerve. This was not fear, but the infirmity of
human nature, oppressed by the presence of a superior being.

At length his agony was overcome. He recollected all his resolution,
and, in a strain of awestruck rapture, thus addressed the heavenly
visitant: “Hast thou then heard, pure spirit! the wailings of my grief?
hast thou descended from the realms of bliss, in pity to my woe? and
art thou come to speak the words of peace to my desponding soul? To bid
the wretched smile, to lift the load of misery and care from the
afflicted breast; to fill thy lover’s heart with joy and pleasing hope,
was still the darling task of my Monimia, ere yet refined to that
perfection which mortality can never attain. No wonder then, blessed
shade, that now, when reunited to thy native heaven, thou art still
kind, propitious, and beneficent to us, who groan in this inhospitable
vale of sorrow thou hast left. Tell me, ah! tell me, dost thou still
remember those fond hours we passed together? Doth that enlightened
bosom feel a pang of soft regret, when thou recallest our fatal
separation? Sure that meekened glance bespeaks thy sympathy! Ah! how
that tender look o’erpowers me! Sacred Heaven! the pearly drops of pity
trickle down thy cheeks! Such are the tears that angels shed o’er man’s
distress!—Turn not away—Thou beckonest me to follow. Yes, I will follow
thee, ethereal spirit, as far as these weak limbs, encumbered with
mortality, will bear my weight; and, would to Heaven! I could, with
ease, put off these vile corporeal shackles, and attend thy flight.”

So saying, he started from the ground, and, in a transport of eager
expectation, at awful distance, traced the footsteps of the apparition,
which, entering a detached apartment, sunk down upon a chair, and with
a sigh exclaimed, “Indeed, this is too much!” What was the disorder of
Renaldo’s mind, when he perceived this phenomenon! Before reflection
could perform its office, moved by a sudden impulse, he sprung
forwards, crying, “If it be death to touch thee, let me die!” and
caught in his arms, not the shadow, but the warm substance of the
all-accomplished Monimia. “Mysterious powers of Providence! this is no
phantom! this is no shade! this is the life! the panting bosom of her
whom I have so long, so bitterly deplored! I fold her in my arms! I
press her glowing breast to mine! I see her blush with virtuous
pleasure and ingenuous love! She smiles upon me with enchanting
tenderness! O let me gaze on that transcendent beauty, which, the more
I view it, ravishes the more! These charms are too intense; I sicken
while I gaze! Merciful Heaven! is not this a mere illusion of the
brain? Was she not fled for ever? Had not the cold hand of death
divorced her from my hope? This must be some flattering vision of my
distempered fancy! perhaps some soothing dream— If such it be, grant, O
ye heavenly powers! that I may never wake.”

“O gentle youth!” replied the beauteous orphan, still clasped in his
embrace, “what joy now fills the bosom of Monimia, at this triumph of
thy virtue and thy love? When I see these transports of thy affection,
when I find thee restored to that place in my esteem and admiration,
which thou hadst lost by the arts of calumny and malice—this is a
meeting which my most sanguine hopes durst not presage!”

So entirely were the faculties of Renaldo engrossed in the
contemplation of his restored Monimia, that he saw not the rest of the
company, who wept with transport over this affecting scene. He was
therefore amazed at the interposition of Madam Clement, who, while the
shower of sympathetic pleasure bedewed her cheeks, congratulated the
lovers upon this happy event, crying, “These are the joys which virtue
calls her own.” They also received the compliments of a reverend
clergyman, who told Monimia, she had reaped, at last, the fruits of
that pious resignation to the will of Heaven, which she had so devoutly
practised during the term of her affliction. And, lastly, they were
accosted by the physician, who was not quite so hackneyed in the ways
of death, or so callous to the finer sensations of the soul, but that
he blubbered plentifully, wile he petitioned Heaven in behalf of such
an accomplished and deserving pair.

Monimia taking Madam Clement by the hand, “Whatever joy,” said she,
“Renaldo derives from this occasion, is owing to the bounty, the
compassion, and maternal care of this incomparable lady, together with
the kind admonitions and humanity of those two worthy gentlemen.”

Melvil, whose passions were still in agitation, and whose mind could
not yet digest the incidents that occurred, embraced them all by turns;
but, like the faithful needle, which, though shaken for an instant from
its poise, immediately regains its true direction, and points
invariably to the pole, he soon returned to his Monimia; again he held
her in his arms, again he drank enchantment from her eyes, and thus
poured forth the effusions of his soul:—“Can I then trust the evidence
of sense? And art thou really to my wish restored? Never, O never did
thy beauty shine with such bewitching grace, as that which now
confounds and captivates my view! Sure there is something more than
mortal in thy looks!—Where hast thou lived?—where borrowed this
perfection?—whence art thou now descended?—Oh! I am all amazement, joy,
and fear!—Thou wilt not leave me!—No! we must not part again. By this
warm kiss! a thousand times more sweet than all the fragrance of the
East! we nevermore will part. O! this is rapture, ecstasy, and what no
language can explain!”

In the midst of these ejaculations, he ravished a banquet from her
glowing lips, that kindled in his heart a flame which rushed through
every vein, and glided to his marrow. This was a privilege he had never
claimed before, and now permitted as a recompense for all the penance
he had suffered. Nevertheless, the cheeks of Monimia, who was
altogether unaccustomed to such familiarities, underwent a total
suffusion; and Madam Clement discreetly relieved her from the anxiety
of her situation, by interfering in the discourse, and rallying the
Count upon his endeavours to monopolise such a branch of happiness.

“O my dear lady!” replied Renaldo, who by this time had, in some
measure, recovered his recollection, “forgive the wild transports of a
fond lover, who hath so unexpectedly retrieved the jewel of his soul!
Yet, far from wishing to hoard up his treasure, he means to communicate
and diffuse his happiness to all his friends. O my Monimia! how will
the pleasure of this hour be propagated! As yet thou knowest not all
the bliss that is reserved for thy enjoyment!—Meanwhile, I long to
learn by what contrivance this happy interview hath been effected.
Still am I ignorant how I was transported into this apartment, from the
lonely vault in which I mourned over my supposed misfortune!”




CHAPTER SIXTY-FOUR

THE MYSTERY UNFOLDED—ANOTHER RECOGNITION, WHICH, IT IS TO BE HOPED, THE
READER COULD NOT FORESEE.


The French lady then explained the whole mystery of Monimia’s death, as
a stratagem she had concerted with the clergyman and doctor, in order
to defeat the pernicious designs of Fathom, who seemed determined to
support his false pretensions by dint of perjury and fraud, which they
would have found it very difficult to elude. She observed, that the
physician had actually despaired of Monimia’s life, and it was not till
after she herself was made acquainted with the prognostic, that she
wrote the letter to Renaldo, which she committed to the care of Madam
Clement, with an earnest entreaty, that it should not be sent till
after her decease. But that lady, believing the Count had been
certainly abused by his treacherous confidant, despatched the billet
without the knowledge of Monimia, whose health was restored by the
indefatigable care of the physician, and the sage exhortations of the
clergyman, by which she was reconciled to life. In a word, the villany
of Fathom had inspired her with some faint hope that Renaldo might
still be innocent; and that notion contributed not a little to her
cure.

The letter having so effectually answered their warmest hopes, in
bringing back Renaldo such a pattern of constancy and love, the
confederates, in consequence of his enthusiastic sorrow, had planned
this meeting, as the most interesting way of restoring two virtuous
lovers to the arms of each other; for which purpose the good clergyman
had pitched upon his own church, and indulged them with the use of the
vestry, in which they now were presented with a small but elegant
collation.

Melvil heard this succinct detail with equal joy and admiration. He
poured forth the dictates of his gratitude to the preservers of his
happiness.—“This church,” said he, “shall henceforth possess a double
share of my veneration; this holy man will, I hope, finish the
charitable work he has begun, by tying those bands of our happiness,
which nought but death shall have power to unbind.” Then turning to
that object which was the star of his regard, “Do I not overrate,” said
he, “my interest with the fair Monimia?” She made no verbal reply; but
answered by an emphatic glance, more eloquent than all the power of
rhetoric and speech. This language, which is universal in the world of
love, he perfectly well understood, and, in token of that faculty,
sealed the assent which she had smiled, with a kiss imprinted on her
polished forehead.

In order to dissipate these interesting ideas, which, by being too long
indulged, might have endangered his reason, Madam Clement entreated him
to entertain the company with a detail of what had happened to him in
his last journey to the empire, and Monimia expressed a desire of
knowing, in particular, the issue of his contest with Count Trebasi,
who, she knew, had usurped the succession of his father.

Thus solicited, he could not refuse to gratify their curiosity and
concern. He explained his obligations to the benevolent Jew; related
the steps he had taken at Vienna for the recovery of his inheritance;
informed them of his happy rencontre with his father-in-law; of his
sister’s deliverance, and marriage; of the danger into which his life
had been precipitated by the news of Monimia’s death; and, lastly, of
his adventure with the banditti, in favour of a gentleman, who, he
afterwards understood, had been robbed in the most base and barbarous
manner by Fathom. He likewise, to the astonishment of all present, and
of his mistress in particular, communicated some circumstances, which
shall appear in due season.

Monimia’s tender frame being quite fatigued with the scene she had
acted, and her mind overwhelmed with the prosperous tidings she had
heard, after having joined the congratulations of the company, on the
good fortune of her Renaldo, begged leave to retire, that she might by
repose recruit her exhausted spirits; and the night being pretty far
spent, she was conducted by her lover to Madam Clement’s coach, that
stood in waiting, in which also the rest of the company made shift to
embark, and were carried to the house of that good lady, where, after
they were invited to dine, and Melvil entreated to bring Don Diego and
the Jew along with them, they took leave of one another, and retired to
their respective lodgings in a transport of joy and satisfaction.

As for Renaldo, his rapture was still mixed with apprehension, that all
he had seen and heard was no more than an unsubstantial vision, raised
by some gay delirium of a disordered imagination. While his breast
underwent those violent, though blissful emotions of joy and
admiration, his friend the Castilian spent the night in ruminating over
his own calamities, and in a serious and severe review of his own
conduct. He compared his own behaviour with that of the young
Hungarian, and found himself so light in the scale, that he smote his
breast with violence, exclaiming in an agony of remorse:

“Count Melvil has reason to grieve; Don Diego to despair. His
misfortunes flow from the villany of mankind; mine are the fruit of my
own madness. He laments the loss of a mistress, who fell a sacrifice to
the perfidious arts of a crafty traitor. She was beautiful, virtuous,
accomplished, and affectionate; he was fraught with sensibility and
love. Doubtless his heart must have deeply suffered; his behaviour
denotes the keenness of his woe; his eyes are everflowing fountains of
tears; his bosom the habitation of sighs; five hundred leagues hath he
measured in a pilgrimage to her tomb; nightly he visits the dreary
vault where she now lies at rest; her solitary grave is his couch; he
converses with darkness and the dead, until each lonely aisle re-echoes
his distress. What would be his penance, had he my cause! were he
conscious of having murdered a beloved wife and darling daughter! Ah
wretch!—ah cruel homicide!—what had those dear victims done to merit
such a fate? Were they not ever gentle and obedient, ever aiming to
give thee satisfaction and delight? Say, that Serafina was enamoured of
a peasant; say, that she had degenerated from the honour of her race.
The inclinations are involuntary; perhaps that stranger was her equal
in pedigree and worth. Had they been fairly questioned, they might have
justified, at least excused, that conduct which appeared so criminal;
or had they owned the offence, and supplicated pardon—O barbarous
monster that I am! was all the husband—was all the father extinguished
in my heart? How shall my own errors be forgiven, if I refused to
pardon the frailties of my own blood—of those who are most dear to my
affection? Yet nature pleaded strongly in their behalf!—My heart was
bursting while I dismissed them to the shades of death. I was maddened
with revenge! I was guided by that savage principle which falsely we
call honour.

“Accursed phantom! that assumes the specious title, and misleads our
wretched nation! Is it then honourable to skulk like an assassin, and
plunge the secret dagger in the heart of some unhappy man, who hath
incurred my groundless jealousy or suspicion, without indulging him
with that opportunity which the worst criminal enjoys? Or is it
honourable to poison two defenceless women, a tender wife, an amiable
daughter, whom even a frown would almost have destroyed?—O! this is
cowardice, brutality, hell-born fury and revenge! Heaven hath not mercy
to forgive such execrable guilt. Who gave thee power, abandoned
ruffian! over the lives of those whom God hath stationed as thy fellows
of probation;—over those whom he had sent to comfort and assist thee;
to sweeten all thy cares, and smooth the rough uneven paths of life? O!
I am doomed to never-ceasing horror and remorse! If misery can atone
for such enormous guilt, I have felt it in the extreme. Like an undying
vulture it preys upon my heart;—to sorrow I am wedded; I hug that
teeming consort to my soul;—never, ah! never shall we part; for soon as
my fame shall shine unclouded by the charge of treason that now hangs
over it, I will devote myself to penitence and woe. A cold, damp
pavement shall be my bed; my raiment shall be sackcloth; the fields
shall furnish herbage for my food; the stream shall quench my thirst;
the minutes shall be numbered by my groans; the night be privy to my
strains of sorrow, till Heaven, in pity to my sufferings, release me
from the penance I endure. Perhaps the saints whom I have murdered will
intercede for my remission.”

Such was the exercise of grief, in which the hapless Castilian consumed
the night; he had not yet consigned himself to rest, when Renaldo
entering his chamber, displayed such a gleam of wildness and rapture on
his countenance, as overwhelmed him with amazement; for, till that
moment, he had never seen his visage unobscured with woe. “Pardon this
abrupt intrusion, my friend,” cried Melvil, “I could no longer withhold
from your participation, the great, the unexpected turn, which hath
this night dispelled all my sorrows, and restored me to the fruition of
ineffable joy. Monimia lives!—the fair, the tender, the virtuous
Monimia lives, and smiles upon my vows! This night I retrieved her from
the grave. I held her in these arms; I pressed her warm delicious lips
to mine! Oh, I am giddy with intolerable pleasure!”

Don Diego was confounded at this declaration, which he considered as
the effects of a disordered brain. He never doubted that Renaldo’s
grief had at length overpowered his reason, and that his words were the
effects of mere frenzy. While he mused on this melancholy subject, the
Count composed his features, and, in a succinct and well-connected
detail, explained the whole mystery of his happiness, to the
inexpressible astonishment of the Spaniard, who shed tears of
satisfaction, and straining the Hungarian to his breast, “O my son,”
said he, “you see what recompense Heaven hath in store for those who
pursue the paths of real virtue; those paths from which I myself have
been fatally misled by a faithless vapour, which hath seduced my steps,
and left me darkling in the abyss of wretchedness. Such as you describe
this happy fair, was once my Serafina, rich in every grace of mind and
body which nature could bestow. Had it pleased Heaven to bless her with
a lover like Renaldo! but no more, the irrevocable shaft is fled. I
will not taint your enjoyment with my unavailing sighs!”

Melvil assured this disconsolate father, that no pleasure, no avocation
should ever so entirely engross his mind, but that he should still find
an hour for sympathy and friendship. He communicated the invitation of
Madam Clement, and insisted upon his compliance, that he might have an
opportunity of seeing and approving the object of his passion. “I can
refuse nothing to the request of Count de Melvil,” replied the
Spaniard, “and it were ungrateful in me to decline the honour you
propose. I own myself inflamed with a desire of beholding a young lady,
whose perfections I have seen reflected in your sorrow; my curiosity
is, moreover, interested on account of that humane gentlewoman, whose
uncommon generosity sheltered such virtue in distress; but my
disposition is infectious, and will, I am afraid, hang like a damp upon
the general festivity of your friends.”

Melvil would take no denial, and having obtained his consent, repaired
to the house of Joshua, whose countenance seemed to unbend gradually
into a total expression of joy and surprise, as he learned the
circumstances of this amazing event. He faithfully promised to attend
the Count at the appointed hour, and, in the meantime, earnestly
exhorted him to take some repose, in order to quiet the agitation of
his spirits, which must have been violently hurried on this occasion.
The advice was salutary, and Renaldo resolved to follow it.

He returned to his lodgings, and laid himself down; but,
notwithstanding the fatigue he had undergone, sleep refused to visit
his eyelids, all his faculties being kept in motion by the ideas that
crowded so fast upon his imagination. Nevertheless, though his mind
continued in agitation, his body was refreshed, and he arose in the
forenoon with more serenity and vigour than he had enjoyed for many
months. Every moment his heart throbbed with new rapture, when he found
himself on the brink of possessing all that his soul held dear and
amiable; he put on his gayest looks and apparel; insisted upon the
Castilian’s doing the same honour to the occasion; and the alteration
of dress produced such an advantageous change in the appearance of Don
Diego, that when Joshua arrived at the appointed hour, he could scarce
recognise his features, and complimented him very politely on the
improvement of his looks.

True it is, the Spaniard was a personage of a very prepossessing mien
and noble deportment; and had not grief, by increasing his native
gravity, in some measure discomposed the symmetry of his countenance,
he would have passed for a man of a very amiable and engaging
physiognomy. They set out in the Jew’s coach for the house of Madam
Clement, and were ushered into an apartment, where they found the
clergyman and physician with that lady, to whom Don Diego and the
Hebrew were by Melvil introduced.

Before they had seated themselves, Renaldo inquired about the health of
Monimia, and was directed to the next room by Madam Clement, who
permitted him to go thither, and conduct her to the company. He was not
slow of availing himself of this permission. He disappeared in an
instant, and, during his short absence, Don Diego was strangely
disturbed The blood flushed and forsook his cheeks by turns; a cold
vapour seemed to shiver through his nerves; and at his breast he felt
uncommon palpitation. Madam Clement observed his discomposure, and
kindly inquired into the cause; when he replied, “I have such an
interest in what concerns the Count de Melvil, and my imagination is so
much prepossessed with the perfections of Monimia, that I am, as it
were, agonised with expectation; yet never did my curiosity before
raise such tumults as those that now agitate my bosom.”

He had scarce pronounced these words, when the door, reopening, Renaldo
led in this mirror of elegance and beauty, at sight of whom the
Israelite’s countenance was distorted into a stare of admiration. But
if such was the astonishment of Joshua, what were the emotions of the
Castilian, when, in the beauteous orphan, he beheld the individual
features of his long-lost Serafina!

His feelings are not to be described. The fond parent, whose affection
shoots even to a sense of pain, feels not half such transport, when he
unexpectedly retrieves a darling child from the engulfing billows or
devouring flame. The hope of Zelos had been totally extinguished. His
heart had been incessantly torn with anguish and remorse, upbraiding
him as the murderer of Serafina. His, therefore, were the additional
transports of a father disburdened of the guilt of such enormous
homicide. His nerves were too much overpowered by this sudden
recognition, to manifest the sensation of his soul by external signs.
He started not, nor did he lift an hand in token of surprise; he moved
not from the spot on which he stood; but, riveting his eyes to those of
the lovely phantom, remained without motion, until she, approaching
with her lover, fell at his feet, and clasping his knees, exclaimed,
“May I yet call you father?”

This powerful shock aroused his faculties; a cold sweat bedewed his
forehead; his knees began to totter; he dropped upon the floor, and
throwing his arms around her, cried, “O nature! O Serafina! Merciful
Providence! thy ways are past finding out.” So saying, he fell upon her
neck, and wept aloud. The tears of sympathetic joy trickled down her
snowy bosom, that heaved with rapture inexpressible. Renaldo’s eyes
poured forth the briny stream. The cheeks of Madam Clement were not dry
in this conjuncture; she kneeled by Serafina, kissed her with all the
eagerness of maternal affection, and with uplifted hands adored the
Power that preordained this blessed event. The clergyman and doctor
intimately shared the general transport; and as for Joshua, the drops
of true benevolence flowed from his eyes, like the oil on Aaron’s
beard, while he skipped about the room in an awkward ecstasy, and in a
voice resembling the hoarse notes of the long-eared tribe, cried, “O
father Abraham! such a moving scene hath not been acted since Joseph
disclosed himself unto his brethren in Egypt.”

Don Diego having found utterance to his passion, proceeded in this
strain: “O my dear child! to find thee thus again, after our last
unhappy parting, is wonderful! miraculous! Blessed be the all-good, my
conscience. I am not then the dire assassin, who sacrificed his wife
and daughter to an infernal motive, falsely titled honour? though I am
more and more involved in a mystery, which I long to hear explained.”

“That shall be my task,” cried Renaldo, “but first permit me to implore
your sanction to my passion for the incomparable Serafina. You already
know our mutual sentiments; and though I own the possession of such
inestimable worth and beauty would be a recompense that infinitely
transcends the merit I can plead, yet, as it hath been my good fortune
to inspire her with a mutual flame, I hope to reap from your indulgence
here, what I could not expect from my own desert; and we present
ourselves, in hope of your paternal assent and benediction.”

“Were she more fair and good and gentle than she is,” answered the
Castilian, “and to my partial observation nought e’er appeared on earth
more beauteous and engaging, I would approve your title to her heart,
and recommend you to her smiles, with all a father’s influence and
power. Yes, my daughter! my joy on this occasion is infinitely
augmented by the knowledge of those tender ties of love that bind thee
to this amiable youth; a youth to whose uncommon courage and generosity
I owe my life and my subsistence, together with the inexpressible
delight that now revels in my bosom. Enjoy, my children, the happy
fruits of your reciprocal attachment. May Heaven, which hath graciously
conducted you through a labyrinth of perplexity and woe, to this
transporting view of blissful days, indulge you with that uninterrupted
stream of pure felicity, which is the hope, and ought to be the boon of
virtue, such as yours!”

So saying, he joined their hands, and embraced them with the most
cordial love and satisfaction, which diffused itself to every
individual of the company, who fervently invoked the Almighty Power, in
behalf of this enraptured pair. The tumult of these emotions having a
little subsided, and the Castilian being seated betwixt Renaldo and his
beauteous bride, he politely bespoke the indulgence of Madam Clement,
begging she would permit him to demand the performance of the Count’s
promise, that he might be forthwith made acquainted with those
circumstances of his own fate which he was so impatient to learn.

The lady having assured him, that she and all the company would take
pleasure in hearing the recapitulation, the Spaniard, addressing
himself to Melvil, “In the name of Heaven!” said he, “how could you
supplant that rival, who fell a sacrifice to my resentment, after he
had bewitched the heart of Serafina? for, sure, the affection he had
kindled in her breast must have long survived his death,” “That rival,”
replied the Count, “who incurred your displeasure, was no other than
Renaldo.” With these words, he applied to one eye a patch of black silk
provided for the purpose, and turning his face towards Don Diego, that
gentleman started with astonishment, crying, “Good Heaven! the very
countenance of Orlando, whom I slew! this is still more amazing!”




CHAPTER SIXTY-FIVE

A RETROSPECTIVE LINK, NECESSARY FOR THE CONCATENATION OF THESE MEMOIRS.


“Indulge me with a patient hearing,” proceeded the Hungarian, “and all
these riddles soon will be explained. Inflamed with the desire of
seeing foreign countries, I disobeyed the will of an indulgent father,
from whose house, withdrawing privately, I set out for Italy, in
disguise, by the way of Tyrol, visited Venice, Rome, Florence, and,
embarking at Naples, in an English ship, arrived at St. Lucar, from
whence I repaired to Seville; there, in a few days, was my curiosity
engaged by the fame of the fair Serafina, who was justly deemed the
most accomplished beauty in that part of Spain. Nay, blush not, gentle
creature! for by my hopes of heaven! thy charms were even injured by
the cold applause of that report. Nevertheless, I was warmly interested
by the uncommon character, and eagerly longed to see this pattern of
perfection. As Don Diego did not train her up in that restraint to
which the Spanish ladies are subjected, I soon found an opportunity of
seeing her at church; and no person here present will, I presume, doubt
but that I was instantly captivated by her beauty and deportment. Had I
thought that Don Diego’s favour was unengaged, perhaps I should have
followed the dictates of vanity and inexperience, and presented myself
in my own character, among the crowd of her professed admirers. I knew
her father had been an officer of distinguished rank and reputation,
and did not doubt that he would have regarded a young soldier of
unexceptionable pedigree, and, I will even add, of untainted fame. Nor
did I suppose my own father could have objected against such an
advantageous match; but, by dint of industrious inquiry, I learned,
that the divine Serafina was already betrothed to Don Manuel de
Mendoza, and this information overwhelmed me with despair.

“After having revolved a thousand projects for retarding and preventing
that detested union, I resolved to avail myself of my talent for
drawing, and professed myself a master of that science, in hope of
being employed by the father of Serafina, who, I knew, let slip no
opportunity of improving his daughter’s education. Accordingly I had
the good fortune to attract his notice, was invited to his house,
honoured with his approbation, and furnished with unrestricted
opportunities of conversing with the dear object of my love. The
passion which her beauty had kindled was by the perfections of her mind
inflamed to such a degree of transport, as could not be concealed from
her penetration. She chanced to relish my conversation; I gradually
acquired her friendship; pity was the next passion that she entertained
in my favour. I then ventured to disclose myself, and the dear charmer
did not disapprove of my presumption. She and her mother had been
perplexed with some religious scruples, concerning which they appealed
to my opinion; and I was happy enough to set their minds at ease.

“This sort of intercourse naturally created a mutual confidence among
us; and, in a word, I was blessed with the daughter’s love and mother’s
approbation. Don Diego will pardon these clandestine measures, which we
took, from a full persuasion that it was impossible to render him
propitious to the views in which our hearts and hands were so deeply
interested. I did not then know how little he was addicted to
superstition.

“Without entering into a detail of the schemes we projected to delay
the happiness of Mendoza, I shall only observe, that, knowing the fatal
day was at length unalterably fixed, we determined to elude the purpose
of Don Diego by flight; and everything was actually prepared for our
escape. When the hour of appointment arrived, I repaired to the place
at which I had proposed to enter the house, and stumbled, in the dark,
over the body of a man still warm, and bleeding. Alarmed at this
occurrence, I darted myself through the window, and rushing to the
apartment of the ladies, (immortal powers!) beheld the peerless
Serafina, and her virtuous mother, stretched on a couch, and, in all
appearance, deprived of life.

“The company will easily conceive what agonies I felt at such a
spectacle! I ran towards the spot in a transport of horror! I clasped
my lovely mistress in my arms, and, finding her still breathing,
endeavoured, but in vain, to wake her from the trance Antonia was
overwhelmed with the same lethargic power. My fancy was immediately
struck with the apprehension of their being poisoned. Regardless of my
own situation, I alarmed the family, called for assistance, and
requested the servants to summon Don Diego to the dismal scene. I was
informed that their master had rode forth in manifest confusion; and
while I pondered on this surprising excursion, an apothecary in the
neighbourhood entered the chamber, and having examined the pulses of
the ladies, declared that their lives were in no danger, and advised
that they should be undressed, and conveyed to bed. While their women
were busied in this employment, I went into the court-yard, attended by
some of the servants with lights, in order to view the body of the man
which I had found at my arrival. His apparel was mean, his countenance
ferocious; a long spado was buckled to his thigh, and, in his belt,
were stuck a brace of loaded pistols; so that we concluded he was some
thief, who had waited for an opportunity, and seeing the casement open,
intended to rob the house, but was prevented, and slain by Don Diego
himself, whose retreat, however, did not a little confound our
conjecture. For my own part, I remained all night in the house,
tortured with fear, vexation, and suspense.

“My hope was altogether disappointed by this unhappy accident; and I
shuddered at the prospect of losing Serafina for ever, either by this
mysterious malady, or by her marriage with Mendoza, which I now
despaired of being able to defeat. The major-domo having waited several
hours for his lord’s return, without seeing him appear, thought proper
to despatch a messenger to Don Manuel, with an account of what had
happened; and that nobleman arriving in the morning, took possession of
the house. About four o’clock in the afternoon, Serafina began to stir,
and, at five, she and her mother were perfectly awake.

“They no sooner recovered the use of reflection, than they gave signs
of equal sorrow and amazement, and earnestly called for Isabella, who
was privy to our design, and who, after a very minute inquiry, was
found in a lone and solitary chamber, where she had been confined. Such
was the confusion of the house, that no person ever dreamed of asking
how I entered, each domestic, in all probability, supposing I had been
introduced by his fellow; so that I tarried unquestioned, on pretence
of concern for the distress of a family in which I had been so
generously entertained, and, by Isabella, sent my respects and duty to
her ladies. She was, therefore, not a little surprised, when, after
every other servant had withdrawn, she heard the lovely Serafina
exclaim, with all the violence of grief, ‘Ah! Isabella, Orlando is no
more!’ But their astonishment was still greater, when she assured them
of my being alive, and in the house. They recounted to her the
adventure of last night, which she explained, by informing them of the
letters which Don Diego had intercepted. And they immediately
concluded, that he had, in the precipitation of his wrath, killed, by
mistake, the person who was found dead in the court-yard. This
conjecture alarmed them on my account; they, by the medium of Isabella,
conjured me to leave the house, lest Don Diego should return, and
accomplish his resentment; and I was persuaded to withdraw, after I had
settled the channel of a correspondence with the confidant.

“Being now obliged to alter our measures, because our former intention
was discovered by Don Diego, I secured a retreat for Serafina and her
mother, at the house of the English consul in Seville, who was my
particular friend; and, next day, understanding from Isabella that her
lord had not yet reappeared, and that Don Manuel was very urgent in his
addresses, we concerted an assignation in the garden, and that same
evening I was fortunate enough to convey my prize to the asylum I had
prepared for their reception. Inexpressible was the rage of Mendoza,
when he heard of their elopement. He raved like one deprived of
reason—swore he would put all the servants of the family to the
rack—and, in consequence of the intelligence he obtained by threats and
promises, set on foot a very strict inquiry, in order to apprehend the
fugitives and Orlando, who had by some means or other incurred his
suspicion.

“We eluded his search by the vigilance and caution of our kind host;
and, while we remained in concealment, were extremely astonished to
hear that the unfortunate Don Diego was proclaimed a traitor, and a
price set upon his head. This information overwhelmed us all with the
utmost affliction. Antonia lamented, without ceasing, the disgrace of
her beloved lord, from whom she never would have withdrawn herself, but
with the lively hope of a reconciliation, after the first transports of
his ire should have subsided, and the real character of Orlando should
have appeared. It was not long before we had reason to believe that
Mendoza was the accuser of Don Diego—

“Nay, start not, Signior; Manuel was actually that traitor! This was
the turn of his revenge! when he found himself disappointed in the hope
of possessing the incomparable Serafina, he took a base advantage of
your absence and retreat. He posted to Madrid, impeached you to the
secretary of state of having maintained a criminal correspondence with
the enemies of Spain, included me in his accusation, as a spy for the
house of Austria, and framed such a plausible tale, from the
circumstances of your distress, that Don Diego was outlawed, and
Mendoza gratified with a grant of his estate.

“These melancholy incidents made a deep impression upon the mind of the
virtuous Antonia, who waiving every other consideration, would have
personally appeared for the vindication of her husband’s honour, had
not we dissuaded her from such a rash undertaking, by demonstrating her
inability to contend with such a powerful antagonist; and representing
that her appearance would be infallibly attended with the ruin of
Serafina, who would certainly fall into the hands of the villain to
whom she had been contracted. We exhorted her to wait patiently for
some happy revolution of fortune, and encouraged her with the hope of
Don Diego’s exerting himself effectually in his own defence.

“Meanwhile our worthy landlord was suddenly cut off by death; and his
widow being resolved to retire into her own country, we secretly
embarked in the same ship, and arrived in England about eighteen months
ago. Antonia still continued to pine over the ruin of her house; as she
could hear no tidings of Don Diego, she concluded he was dead, and
mourned with unabating sorrow. In vain I assured her, that, soon as my
own affairs should be adjusted, I would exert my whole endeavours to
find and succour him. She could not imagine that a man of his spirit
and disposition would live so long in obscurity. And her affliction
derived new force from the death of the consul’s widow, with whom she
had lived in the most unbounded intimacy and friendship. From that day,
her health evidently declined. She foresaw her dissolution, and
comforted herself with the hope of seeing her husband and her friend in
a place where no treachery is felt, and no sorrow is known; confident
of my integrity, and the purity of my love, she, in the most pathetic
terms, recommended Serafina to my care.

“Ha! weepest thou, fair excellence, at the remembrance of that tender
scene, when the good Antonia, on the bed of death, joined thy soft hand
to mine, and said, ‘Renaldo, I bequeath this orphan to your love; it is
a sacred pledge, which, if you cherish with due honour and regard,
internal peace and happiness will ever smile within your bosom; but if
you treat it with indifference, dishonour, or neglect, just Heaven will
punish your breach of trust with everlasting disappointments and
disquiet.’

“Signior Don Diego, I see you are moved, and therefore will not dwell
on such distressful circumstances. The excellent Antonia exchanged this
life for a more happy state; and so exquisite was the sorrow of the
tender-hearted Serafina, as to torture me with the apprehension that
she would not long survive her pious mother. How I obeyed the
injunctions of that departing saint, Monimia (for that name she now
assumed) can testify, until that artful serpent Fathom glided into our
mutual confidence, abused our ears, poisoned our unsuspected faith, and
effected that fatal breach, productive of all the misery and vexation
which we have suffered, and which is now so happily expelled.”

“Heaven,” said the Castilian, “hath visited me for the sins and errors
of my youth; yet, such mercy hath been mingled with its chastisements,
I dare not murmur or repine. The tears of penitence and sorrow shall
water my Antonia’s grave; as for Mendoza, I rejoice at his treachery,
by which the obligation of my promise is cancelled, and my honour fully
acquitted. He shall not triumph in his guilt. My services, my
character, and innocence shall soon confront his perfidy, and, I hope,
defeat his interest. The King is just and gracious, nor is my family
and name unknown.”

Here the Jew interposing, presented to him a letter from a person of
consequence at Madrid, whom Joshua had interested in the cause of Don
Diego; that nobleman had already found means to represent the case of
Zelos to his Majesty, who had actually ordered Don Manuel to be
confined, until the injured person should appear to justify himself,
and prosecute his accuser according to the terms of law. At the same
time Don Diego was summoned to present himself before the King within a
limited time, to answer to the charge which Mendoza had brought against
him.

The Spaniard’s heart overflowed with gratitude and joy, when he read
this intimation; he embraced the Jew, who, before Zelos could give
utterance to his thoughts, told him that the Spanish Ambassador at
London, having been prepossessed in his favour, craved the honour of
seeing Don Diego; and that he, Joshua, was ready to conduct him to the
house.

“Then is my heart at rest!” cried the Castilian; “the house of Zelos
once more shall lift up its head. I shall again revisit my native
country with honour, and abase the villain who hath soiled my fame! O
my children! this day is replete with such joy and satisfaction, as I
did not think had been in the power of Heaven to grant, without the
interposition of a miracle! To you, Renaldo, to you illustrious lady,
and to these worthy gentlemen, am I indebted for the restoration of
that for which alone I wish to live; and when my heart ceases to retain
the obligation, may I forfeit the name of a Castilian, and scorn and
dishonour be my portion.”

Perhaps all Europe could not produce another company so happy as that
which now sat down to dinner in the house of Madam Clement, whose own
benevolent heart was peculiarly adapted for such enjoyment. The lovers
feasted their eyes more than their appetite, by a tender intercourse of
glances, which needed not the slow interpretation of speech; while the
Spaniard regarded them alternately with looks of wonder and paternal
joy, and every individual surveyed the all-deserving pair with
admiration and esteem.

Serafina taking the advantage of this general satisfaction, when the
heart, softened into complacency, deposits every violent thought: “I
must now,” said she, “try my interest with Renaldo. The good company
shall bear witness to my triumph or repulse. I do not ask you to
forgive, but to withhold your vengeance from the wretched Fathom. His
fraud, ingratitude, and villany are, I believe, unrivalled; yet his
base designs have been defeated; and Heaven perhaps hath made him the
involuntary instrument for bringing our constancy and virtue to the
test; besides, his perfidy is already punished with the last degree of
human misery and disgrace. The doctor, who has traced him in all his
conduct and vicissitudes of fortune, will draw a picture of his present
wretchedness, which, I doubt not, will move your compassion, as it hath
already excited mine.”

The generous hostess was ready to enforce this charitable proposal with
all her eloquence, when Melvil, with a look that well expressed his
magnanimity of love, replied, “Such a boon becomes the gentle Serafina!
O! every moment furnishes me with fresh matter to admire the virtues of
thy soul. If thou, whose tender heart hath been so rent with misery and
anguish, canst intercede for thy tormentor, who now suffers in his
turn, shall I refuse to pardon the miserable wretch! No, let me glory
in imitating the great example, and solicit Don Diego in behalf of the
same miscreant whose perfidious barbarity cost him such intolerable
woe.” “Enough,” cried the Castilian, “I have disclaimed the vindictive
principles of a Spaniard; and leave the miserable object to the sting
of his own conscience, which, soon or late, will not fail to avenge the
wrongs we have sustained from his deceit.”




CHAPTER SIXTY-SIX

THE HISTORY DRAWS NEAR A PERIOD.


Universal was the applause which they acquired by this noble sacrifice
of their resentment. The afternoon was spent in the utmost harmony and
good-humour; and at the earnest solicitation of Renaldo, whose fancy
still harboured the apprehensions of another separation, Don Diego
consented that the indissoluble knot should be tied between that young
gentleman and Serafina in two days, and the place appointed for the
ceremony was the very church where they had been restored to the arms
of each other.

The lovely bride, with a silent blush that set her lover’s heart on
fire, submitted to this determination, in consequence of which the
company was bespoke for that auspicious hour, and the evening being
pretty far advanced, they took leave of the ladies, and retired to
their respective homes; Don Diego and his future son-in-law being
reconducted to their lodgings, in the coach of the Jew, who, taking an
opportunity of being alone with Melvil, observed that it would be
necessary on this occasion to supply the Castilian with a sum of money,
in order to support his dignity and independence, in furnishing
Serafina with everything suitable to her rank and merit; and that he
would willingly accommodate him, provided he knew how to propose it so
as to give no offence to his punctilious disposition.

Renaldo, thanking him for this generous anticipation, advised him to
solicit the Spaniard’s correspondence in the way of business, and to
put the whole on the footing of his own interest; by which means Don
Diego’s delicacy could sustain no affront. Fraught with this
instruction, the Israelite desired a private audience of the Castilian,
in which, after an apology for the freedom of his demand, “Signior Don
Diego,” said he, “as your fortune hath been so long embezzled by your
adversary in Spain, and your correspondence with that country entirely
cut off, it is not to be supposed that your finances are at present in
such a condition as to maintain the splendour of your family. Count de
Melvil’s whole fortune is at your command; and had not he been afraid
of giving umbrage to the peculiar delicacy of your sentiments, he would
have pressed you to use it for your convenience. For my own part, over
and above the inclination I have to serve Don Diego, I consult my own
private advantage in desiring you to accept my service on this
occasion. Money is the chief commodity in which I deal, and, if you
honour me with your commands, I shall be a gainer by my obedience.”

Don Diego replied, with a smile that denoted how well he understood the
meaning of this address, “Surely, Signior, I am bound by the strongest
ties to exert my utmost endeavours for your advantage; and I pray God
this your proposal may have that issue. I am well acquainted with the
Count’s generosity and refined notions of honour; and too much obliged
by him already, to hesitate with punctilious reserve in accepting his
future assistance. Nevertheless, since you have contrived a scheme for
removing all scruples of that sort, I shall execute it with pleasure;
and, in the form of business, you shall have all the security I can
give for what shall be necessary to answer my present occasions.”

The preliminaries being thus settled, Joshua advanced for his use a
thousand pounds, for which he would take neither bond, note, nor
receipt, desiring only that the Castilian would mark it in his own
pocket-book, that the debt might appear, in case any accident should
befall the borrower. Although the Spaniard had been accustomed to the
uncommon generosity of Melvil, he could not help wondering at this
nobleness of behaviour, so little to be expected from any merchant,
much less from a Jewish broker.

While this affair was on the anvil, Renaldo, who could no longer
withhold the communication of his happiness from his sister and
relations in Germany, took up the pen, and, in a letter to his
brother-in-law, recounted all the circumstances of the surprising turn
of fate which he had experienced since his arrival in England. He
likewise related the story of Don Diego, informed them of the day
appointed for his nuptials, and entreated the Major to make a journey
to London with his wife; or, if that should be impracticable, to come
as far as Brussels, where they should be met by him and his Serafina.
There was now but one day between him and the accomplishment of his
dearest wish, and that was spent in procuring a licence, and adjusting
the preparations for the grand festival. Don Diego in the forenoon
visited Madam Clement, to whom he repeated his warm acknowledgments of
her bounty and maternal affection to his daughter, and presented to
Serafina bank notes to the amount of five hundred pounds, to defray the
necessary expense for her wedding ornaments.

All the previous steps being taken for the solemnisation of this
interesting event, and the hour of appointment arrived, the bridegroom,
accompanied by his father-in-law, hastened to the place of rendezvous,
which was the vestry-room of the church we have already described;
where they were received by the good clergyman in his canonicals; and
here they had not waited many minutes, when they were joined by Madam
Clement and the amiable bride, escorted by the friendly physician, who
had all along borne such a share in their concerns. Serafina was
dressed in a sack of white satin, and the ornaments of her head were
adjusted in the Spanish fashion, which gave a peculiar air to her
appearance, and an additional spirit to those attractions which engaged
the heart of each beholder. There was nothing remarkable in the habit
of Renaldo, who had copied the plainness and elegance of his mistress;
but, when she entered the place, his features were animated with a
double proportion of vivacity, and their eyes meeting, seemed to kindle
a blaze which diffused warmth and joy through the countenances of all
present.

After a short pause, her father led her to the altar, and gave her away
to the transported Renaldo, before the priest who performed the
ceremony, and bestowed the nuptial benediction on this enraptured pair.
The sanction of the church being thus obtained, they withdrew into the
vestry, where Melvil sealed his title on her rosy lips, and presented
his wife to the company, who embraced her in their turns, with fervent
wishes for their mutual happiness.

Though the scene of this transaction was remote from any inhabited
neighbourhood, the church was surrounded by a crowd of people, who,
with uncommon demonstration of surprise and admiration, petitioned
Heaven to bless so fair a couple. Such indeed was their eagerness to
see them, that some lives were endangered by the pressure of the crowd,
which attended them with loud acclamations to the coach, after the
bridegroom had deposited in the hands of the minister one hundred
pounds for the benefit of the poor of that parish, and thrown several
handfuls of money among the multitude. Serafina re-embarked in Madam
Clement’s convenience, with that good lady and Don Diego, while
Renaldo, with the clergyman and doctor, followed in Joshua’s coach, to
a pleasant country-house upon the Thames, at a distance of a few miles
from London. This the Jew had borrowed from the owner for a few days,
and there they were received by that honest Hebrew, who had provided a
very elegant entertainment for the occasion. He had also bespoke a
small but excellent band of music, which regaled their ears while they
sat at dinner; and the afternoon being calm and serene, he prevailed on
them to take the air on the river, in a barge which he had prepared for
the purpose.

But, notwithstanding this diversity of amusement, Renaldo would have
found it the longest day he had ever passed, had not his imagination
been diverted by an incident which employed his attention during the
remaining part of the evening. They had drunk tea, and engaged in a
party at whist, when they were surprised with a noise of contention
from a public-house, that fronted the windows of the apartment in which
they sat. Alarmed at this uproar, they forsook their cards, and,
throwing up the casement, beheld a hearse surrounded by four men on
horseback, who had stopped the carriage, and violently pulled the
driver from his seat. This uncommon arrest had engaged the curiosity of
the publican’s family, who stood at the door to observe the
consequence, when all of a sudden appeared a person in canonicals, well
mounted, who, riding up to those who maltreated the driver, bestowed
upon one of them such a blow with the butt-end of his whip, as laid him
sprawling on the ground; and, springing from his saddle upon the box,
took the reins into his own hand, swearing with great vehemence, that
he would murder every man who should attempt to obstruct the hearse.

The good priest who had married Renaldo was not a little scandalised at
this ferocious behaviour in a clergyman, and could not help saying
aloud, he was a disgrace to the cloth when the horseman looking up to
the window, replied, “Sir, may I be d—n’d, if any man in England has a
greater respect for the cloth than I have; but at present I am quite
distracted.” So saying, he whipped up the horses, and had actually
disentangled the hearse from those who surrounded it, when he was
opposed by another troop, one of whom alighted with great expedition,
and cut the harness so as that he could not possibly proceed. Finding
himself thus driven to bay, he leaped upon the ground, and exercised
his weapon with such amazing strength and agility, that several of his
antagonists were left motionless on the field, before he was
overpowered and disarmed by dint of numbers, who assailed him on all
sides.

The mad parson being thus taken prisoner, an elderly person, of a very
prepossessing appearance, went up to the hearse, and, unbolting the
door, a young lady sprung out, and shrieking, ran directly to the
public-house, to the infinite astonishment and affright of the whole
family, who believed it was the spirit of the deceased person, whose
body lay in the carriage. Renaldo, who was with difficulty restrained
from interposing in behalf of the clergyman against such odds, no
sooner perceived this apparition, than, supposing her to be some
distressed damsel, his Quixotism awoke, he descended in an instant, and
rushed into the house, among those that pursued the fair phantom. Don
Diego and the physician took the same road, while the real clergyman
and Joshua tarried with the ladies, who were, by this time, very much
interested in the event.

Melvil found the young lady in the hands of the old gentleman, who had
released her from the hearse, and who now bitterly upbraided her for
her folly and disobedience; while she protested with great vivacity,
that whatever she might suffer from his severity, she would never
submit to the hateful match he had proposed, nor break the promise she
had already made to the gentleman who now attempted to rescue her from
the tyranny of a cruel father. This declaration was followed by a
plentiful shower of tears, which the father could not behold with
unmoistened eyes, although he reviled her with marks of uncommon
displeasure; and turning to the Count, “I appeal to you, sir,” said he,
“whether I have not reason to curse the undutiful obstinacy of that
pert baggage, and renounce her for ever as an alien to my blood. She
has, for some months, been solicited in marriage by an honest citizen,
a thirty thousand pound man; and instead of listening to such an
advantageous proposal, she hath bestowed her heart upon a young fellow
not worth a groat. Ah! you degenerate hussy, this comes of your plays
and romances. If thy mother were not a woman of an unexceptionable life
and conversation, I should verily believe thou art no child of mine.
Run away with a beggar! for shame!”

“I suppose,” replied Renaldo, “the person to whom your daughter’s
affection inclines, is that clergyman who exerted himself so manfully
at the door?” “Clergyman!” cried the other, “adad! he has more of the
devil than the church about him. A ruffian! he has, for aught I know,
murdered the worthy gentleman whom I intended for my son-in-law; and
the rogue, if I had not kept out of his way, would, I suppose, have
served me with the same sauce. Me! who have been his master for many
years, and had resolved to make a man of him. Sir, he was my own clerk,
and this is the return I have met with from the serpent which I
cherished in my bosom.”

Here he was interrupted by the arrival of the citizen for whom he had
expressed such concern; that gentleman had received a contusion upon
one eye, by which the sight was altogether obstructed, so that he
concluded he should never retrieve the use of that organ, and with
great clamour took all the spectators to witness the injury he had
sustained; he entered the room with manifest perturbation, demanded
satisfaction of the father, and peremptorily declared it should not be
a lost eye to him if there was law in England. This unseasonable
demand, and the boisterous manner in which it was made, did not at all
suit the present humour of the old gentleman, who told him peevishly he
owed him no eye, and bade him go and ask reparation of the person who
had done him wrong.

The young lady snatching this favourable occasion, earnestly entreated
Melvil and his company to intercede with her father in behalf of her
lover, who, she assured them, was a young gentleman of a good family,
and uncommon merit; and in compliance with her request they invited him
and his daughter to the house in which they lodged, where they would be
disencumbered of the crowd which this dispute had gathered together,
and more at leisure to consult about the measures necessary to be
taken. The old gentleman thanked them for their courtesy, which he did
not think proper to refuse, and while he led, or rather hauled
Mademoiselle over the way, under the auspices of the Castilian, Renaldo
set the lover at liberty, made him a tender of his good offices, and
advised him to wait at the public-house for an happy issue of their
negotiation.

The pseudo-parson was very much affected by this generous proffer, for
which he made suitable acknowledgments, and protested before God he
would die a thousand deaths rather than part with his dear Charlotte.
Her father no sooner entered the apartment, than he was known by Joshua
to be a considerable trader in the city of London, and the merchant was
glad to find himself among his acquaintance. He was so full of the
story which had brought him thither, that he had scarce sat down when
he began to complain of his hard fate, in having an only child who was
so mean, stubborn, and contumacious; and every sentence was concluded
with an apostrophe of reproaches to the delinquent.

The Jew having allowed him to ring out his alarm, condoled his
misfortune, and gravely counselled the young lady to wean her
affections from such an unworthy object, for he supposed her favourite
was a man of no principle, or liberal endowments, otherwise her father
would not exclaim so bitterly against her conduct. Charlotte, who
wanted neither beauty nor understanding, assured him that her lover’s
character was, in all respects, unblemished, for the truth of which
assertion she appealed to her papa, who owned, with reluctance, that
the young man was a gentleman by birth, that he had served him with
remarkable diligence and integrity, and that his accomplishments were
far superior to his station in life. “But then,” said he, “the fellow
has not a shilling of his own, and would you have me give away my
daughter to a beggar?”

“God forbid!” cried the Jew, “I always understood you possessed an
ample fortune, and am sorry to find it otherwise.” “Otherwise!” cried
the citizen, with some acrimony, “take care what you say, sir; a
merchant’s credit is not to be tampered with.” “I beg your pardon,”
answered the Hebrew, “I concluded that your circumstances were bad,
because you objected to the poverty of the young man after you had
owned he was possessed of every other qualification to make your
daughter happy; for it is not to be imagined that you would thwart her
inclinations, or seek to render an only child miserable on account of
an obstacle which you yourself could easily remove. Let us suppose you
can afford to give with your daughter ten thousand pounds, which would
enable this young man to live with credit and reputation, and engage
advantageously in trade, for which you say he is well qualified, the
alternative then will be, whether you would rather see her in the arms
of a deserving youth whom she loves, enjoying all the comforts of life
with a moderate fortune, which it will always be in your own power to
improve, or tied for life to a monied man whom she detests, cursing her
hard fate, and despising that superfluity of wealth, in spite of which
she finds herself so truly wretched.”

The old gentleman seemed to be startled at this observation, which was
reinforced by Renaldo’s saying, that he would, moreover, enjoy the
unutterable pleasure of giving happiness to a worthy man, whose
gratitude would co-operate with his love, in approving himself a
dutiful son, as well as an affectionate husband. He then represented
the family disquiets and dismal tragedies produced from such mercenary
and compulsive matches, and, in conclusion related the story of Don
Diego and his daughter, which when the merchant heard, he started up
with marks of terror in his countenance, and, throwing up the casement,
called upon Valentine with great vociferation. This was the name of his
daughter’s admirer, who no sooner heard the summons than he flew to the
spot from whence it came, and the merchant, without any further
preamble, seizing his hand, joined it with that of Charlotte, saying,
with great trepidation, “Here, take her, in the name of God, and thank
this honourable company for your good fortune.”

The lovers were transported with exquisite joy at this sudden
determination in their favour. Valentine, having kissed the hand of his
mistress with all the eagerness of rapture, and acknowledged the
merchant’s generosity, paid his respects to the ladies with a very
polite address, and with demonstrations of uncommon gratitude and
sensibility, thanked the gentlemen, and the Count in particular, for
their good offices, to which he attributed the happiness he now
enjoyed. While Serafina and Madam Clement caressed the amiable
Charlotte, the rest of the company congratulated her admirer upon his
choice and success, though the clergyman could not help reprehending
him for profaning the sacerdotal habit.

Valentine heartily asked pardon for having given such cause of offence,
and hoped he should be forgiven, as it was a disguise which he thought
absolutely necessary for the execution of a scheme upon which his
happiness depended. He then, at the request of Renaldo, unfolded the
mystery of the hearse, by giving them to understand that Charlotte’s
father having got inkling of their mutual passion, had dismissed his
clerk, and conveyed his daughter to a country-house in the
neighbourhood of London, in order to cut off their correspondence;
notwithstanding these precautions they had found means to communicate
with each other by letters, which were managed by a third person; and
his rival being very importunate in his solicitations, they had
concerted the expedient of the hearse, which he provided and conducted
through a road contiguous to the end of the merchant’s garden, where
Charlotte, being apprised of the design, waited for its approach, and
embarked in it without hesitation. Valentine thought himself
sufficiently screened from discovery by his disguise, but he was
unfortunately met by a servant of the family, who recollected his
features, and immediately gave the alarm, upon which the father and his
friends took horse, and pursued them by two different roads, until they
were overtaken at this place.

He had scarce finished this short relation, when his rival, bluntly
entering the apartment, with an handkerchief tied round his eye,
committed Valentine to the charge of a constable, who attended him, by
a warrant from a justice of the peace in that neighbourhood, and
threatened to prosecute the merchant on an action of damages for the
loss of an eye, which he said he had sustained in his service. The
company endeavoured to appease this citizen, by representing that his
misfortune was no other than a common inflammation, nor was it owing to
malice aforethought, but entirely to the precipitate passion of an
incensed young man, who, by the bye, acted in his own defence. At the
same time the merchant promised to make any reasonable satisfaction,
upon which the other demanded an obligation, importing that he would,
in ten days from the date, bestow upon him his daughter in marriage,
with a portion of fifteen thousand pounds, or, in case of failure, pay
him double the sum.

The merchant, exasperated at this extravagant demand, told him flatly
he had already disposed of his daughter to Valentine, who, he believed,
was a much more deserving man, and that he was ready to wait upon the
magistrate who had granted the warrant, in order to give bail for his
future son-in-law. This was a mortifying declaration to the plaintiff,
though he condoled himself with the hope of being a gainer by the loss
of his eye, and now the pain was over would have been very sorry to
find his sight retrieved. The old gentleman, Joshua, and Renaldo
accompanied the prisoner to the house of the justice, where he was
immediately admitted to bail. Upon their return Valentine shifted his
dress, and they supped together with great cordiality and mirth,
maintained at the expense of the discarded lover.

After supper Don Diego walked a minuet with Madam Clement; for whom, by
this time, he had contracted an extraordinary degree of affection.
Valentine had the honour to dance with the incomparable Serafina, whose
beauty and attractions dazzled the eyes of the new-comers, and struck
her bashful partner with awe and confusion; and Melvil presented his
hand to the agreeable Charlotte, who performed so much to the
satisfaction of her father, that he could not help expressing his joy
and pride. He praised God for throwing him in the way of our company,
and engaged the clergyman to unite the young couple, after having
appointed a day for the ceremony, and invited all present to the
wedding. The evening having been insensibly consumed in these
avocations, and the night pretty far advanced, the ladies withdrew
without ceremony; and the retreat of Serafina filled Renaldo’s breast
with tumult and emotion; his blood began to flow in impetuous tides,
his heart to beat with redoubled vigour and velocity, while his eyes
seemed to flash with more than human splendour. Now his imagination
began to anticipate with the enthusiastic rage of an inspired sibyl; he
was instantaneously transported from the conversation, and every nerve
was braced to such a degree of impatience, that human nature could not
long endure the tension.

He, therefore, having withstood the impulse about a quarter of an hour,
at length gave way to his impetuosity, and, springing from his friends,
found himself in a dark passage, at the farther end of which he
perceived Madam Clement coming out of a chamber with a light, which, at
sight of him, she set down, and vanished in a moment. This was the star
that pointed to his paradise; he hailed the signal, entered the
apartment, and, like a lion, rushing on his prey, approached the
nuptial bed, where Serafina, surrounded by all the graces of beauty,
softness, sentiment, and truth, lay trembling as a victim at the altar,
and strove to hide her blushes from his view—the door was shut, the
light extinguished—he owned his lot was more than mortal man could
claim.

Here let me draw the decent veil that ought to shade the secret
mysteries of Hymen. Away, unhallowed scoffers, who profane, with idle
pleasantry or immodest hint, these holy rites; and leave those happy
lovers to enjoy, in one another’s arms, unutterable bliss, the
well-earned palm of virtue and of constancy, which had undergone the
most severe refinement. A more deserving pair night’s curtain shrouds
not in its dark extent.

The thoughts of Renaldo’s felicity threw a damp on the spirits of
Valentine, who saw the term of his probation protracted a few days
longer, and could not help wishing in his heart that he had achieved
the adventure which would have abridged his expectation, though at the
expense of the old gentleman’s displeasure. He filled a bumper to the
health of the bride and bridegroom, and throwing up his eyes with marks
of admiration, exclaimed, “How happy is the Count! alas! five days
longer must I rein my impatience!” “It is but reasonable, you rogue,
that your betters should have the start of you,” said the merchant, who
did him justice in the glass, and counselled him to drown his
impatience with good claret. The youth followed his advice, and it was
late before the company retired to rest.

These citizens, however, resolved to seize an opportunity of rallying
the new-married couple, according to custom, and with that view arose
early in the morning, on the supposition of finding them still asleep;
but they were not a little surprised, when they entered the
breakfasting room, to see Renaldo, and his amiable bed-fellow, already
dressed, and awaiting to do the honours of the house. The old gentleman
would fain have cracked a joke upon their extraordinary despatch, but
he was so much overawed by the dignity and tamed by the sweetness of
Serafina’s carriage, that he durst not give utterance to his
conception; and Valentine stood silent and abashed, as in the presence
of a superior being. After breakfast these gentlemen and Charlotte
again expressed their sense of the obligations they owed to this happy
family, repeated their invitation, and, taking leave, returned to
London in a coach that was provided overnight.

Our friends being thus left to themselves, Don Diego turned towards
Melvil: “Now,” said he, “that I have yielded to the impatience of your
love, as well as to the eagerness of my own desire to make you happy, I
must beg leave to interrupt, for a little while, the stream of your
mutual pleasure, and propose a melancholy excursion, which, however,
will not be wholly void of enjoyment. I have too long delayed the
performance of my duty at Antonia’s grave—let us spend the forenoon in
that pious pilgrimage—I will drop a few tears to the memory of that
excellent woman, and never afterwards shall my friends be troubled with
my grief.”

The proposal being universally approved, they set out for the place,
which had oft been visited by the gentle Serafina, who conducted her
father to a black marble stone, which Renaldo had ordered to be laid
over the grave; and, as he kneeled to kiss the monument, he perceived
this plain inscription in the Spanish tongue:—Antonia de Zelos primera
en todo lo que es ser bueno, y sin segundo en todo lo que fue ser
desdichado, quedad con Dios! that is, Antonia de Zelos, unmatched in
virtue, and unequalled in misfortune, adieu! “O faithful record!” cried
the Castilian, smiting his breast, while his tears distilled upon the
marble, “thy goodness was the gift of Heaven, but thy misfortunes were
derived from the guilt of Don Diego; yet his sorrow shall expiate his
offence, and his penitence find favour in the sight of Heaven! Rest,
rest, ill-fated virtue!—eternal peace shall guard thy tomb, and angels
minister to thy unspotted shade; nor shall thine ashes lie in dark
obscurity here will I raise a monument, more suited to thy excellence
and name.” Serafina melted with filial tenderness; nor were the rest
unmoved at this affecting scene, which Don Diego did not quit without
reluctance.




CHAPTER SIXTY-SEVEN

THE LONGEST AND THE LAST.


The nature of this visit had softened every heart, and saddened every
countenance; and they walked in solemn silence to the other side of the
church-yard, in order to regain their carriages; when, at the turning
of the stile, they saw a young woman, in wretched attire, running out
of a poor habitation, wringing her hands in all the agony of despair.
Notwithstanding the distraction in her countenance, and the meanness of
her apparel, she discovered a regularity of features, and a delicacy of
air, which did not at all correspond with the misery of her equipage.
These exhibitions of extreme distress soon attracted the notice and
compassion of our company, and Melvil’s beauteous help-mate, accosting
this forlorn damsel with a pity-breathing aspect, asked the cause of
her disorder.

“Alas! dear lady,” cried the other, with all the emphasis of woe, “an
unhappy gentleman now breathes his last within this inhospitable hovel,
amidst such excess of misery as would melt the most flinty bosom. What
then must I feel, who am connected with him by the strongest ties of
love and conjugal affection?” “Who is the unfortunate object?” said the
physician. “He was once well known in the gay world,” replied the young
woman; “his name is Fathom.” Every individual of the company started at
mention of that detested name. Serafina began to tremble with emotion;
and Renaldo, after a short pause, declared he would go in, not with a
view to exult over his misery, but in order to contemplate the
catastrophe of such a wicked life, that the moral might be the more
deeply engraved on his remembrance. The young Countess, whose tender
heart could not bear the shock of such a spectacle, retired to the
coach with Madam Clement and the Jew, while Renaldo, accompanied by the
rest, entered a dismal apartment, altogether void of furniture and
convenience, where they beheld the wretched hero of these memoirs
stretched almost naked upon straw, insensible, convulsed, and seemingly
in the grasp of death. He was worn to the bone either by famine or
distemper; his face was overshadowed with hair and filth; his eyes were
sunk, glazed, and distorted; his nostrils dilated; his lips covered
with a black slough; and his complexion faded into a pale clay-colour,
tending to a yellow hue. In a word, the extremity of indigence,
squalor, and distress could not be more feelingly represented.

While Melvil perused this melancholy lesson, and groaning, cried,
“Behold the fate of man!” he perceived a letter in the right hand of
the unfortunate Fathom, which lay fast clenched across his breast.
Curious to know the contents of this paper, which the young woman said
he had kept in that position for several days, he drew nearer the
wretched couch, and was not a little surprised to see it addressed to
the Right Honourable Renaldo Count de Melvil, to the care of Mr. Joshua
Manesseh, merchant in London. When he attempted to disengage this
billet from the author’s hand, the sorrowing female fell upon her
knees, entreating him to desist, and telling him, she had promised,
upon oath, to communicate the contents to no person upon earth, but to
carry the letter, upon her husband’s decease, to the gentleman to whose
care it was directed.

Renaldo assured her, upon his honour, that he was the very Renaldo
Count de Melvil, for whom it was intended; and the young creature was
so much confounded at this information, that, before she could
recollect herself, Melvil had opened the billet, and read these words:
“If this paper should fall into the hands of the noble Renaldo, he will
understand, that Fathom was the most execrable traitor that ever
imposed upon unsuspecting benevolence, or attempted to betray a
generous benefactor. His whole life was a series of fraud, perfidy, and
the most abominable ingratitude. But, of all the crimes that lay heavy
upon his soul, his being accessory to the death of the incomparable
Serafina, whose father he had also robbed, was that for which he
despaired of Heaven’s forgiveness, notwithstanding the dreadful
compunction and remorse which have long preyed upon his heart, together
with the incredible misery and deplorable death which by this time he
hath undergone. Though these sufferings and sorrows cannot atone for
his enormous guilt, perhaps they will excite the compassion of the
humane Count de Melvil; at least, this confession, which my conscience
dictates under all the terrors of death and futurity, may be a warning
for him to avoid henceforth a smiling villain, like the execrable
Fathom, upon whose miserable soul Almighty God have mercy.”

Renaldo was deeply affected with the contents of this scroll, which
denoted such horror and despair. He saw there could be no dissimulation
or sinister design in this profession of penitence. He beheld the
condition of the writer, which put all his humane passions in
commotion; so that he remembered nothing of Fathom but his present
distress. He could scarce maintain those indications which might have
been justly deemed the effect of weakness and infirmity; and having
desired the physician and clergyman to contribute their assistance for
the benefit of that wretch’s soul and body, he ran to the coach, and
communicated the letter to the ladies; at the same time drawing a
picture of the object he had seen, which brought tears into the eyes of
the gentle Serafina, who earnestly entreated her lord to use his
endeavours for the relief and recovery of the unhappy man, that he
might, if possible, live to enjoy the benefit of mature repentance, and
not die in that dreadful despair which he manifested in the letter.

Renaldo, returning to the house, found the pious clergyman reading
prayers with great fervency, while Don Diego stood with his right hand
upon his breast, looking steadfastly upon the agonising Fathom, and the
young woman kneeled, with her streaming eyes lifted up to heaven, in an
ecstasy of grief and devotion. The physician had run to an apothecary’s
shop in the neighbourhood, from whence he soon returned with an
assistant, who applied a large blister to the back of the miserable
patient, while the female, by the doctor’s direction, moistened his
mouth with a cordial which he had prescribed.

These charitable steps being taken, Count de Melvil entreated the
apothecary’s servant to procure a tent-bed for the accommodation of the
sick person with all imaginable despatch; and, in less than an hour,
one was actually pitched, and Fathom lifted into it, after he had been
shifted, and in some measure purified from the dregs of his indigence.
During this transaction the ladies were conducted to a tavern not far
off, where dinner was bespoke, that they might be at hand to see the
effect of their charity, which was not confined to what we have already
described, but extended so far, that, in a little time, the apartment
was comfortably furnished, and the young creature provided with change
of apparel, and money to procure the necessaries of subsistence.

Notwithstanding all their care, the wretched Fathom still remained
insensible, and the doctor pronounced a very unfavourable prognostic,
while he ordered a pair of additional vesicatories to be laid upon his
arms, and other proper medicines to be administered. After dinner, the
ladies ventured to visit the place, and when Serafina crossed the
threshold, the weeping female fell at her feet, and, kissing her robe,
exclaimed, “Sure you are an angel from heaven.”

The alteration in her dress had made a very agreeable change in her
appearance, so that the Countess could now look upon her without
shuddering at her distress. And, as Fathom was not in a condition to be
disturbed, she took this opportunity of inquiring by what steps that
unfortunate wretch was conveyed from the prison, in which she knew he
had been confined, to the place where he now lay in such extremity; and
by what occurrence he had found a wife in such an abyss of misfortune.
Here the other’s tears began to flow afresh. “I am ashamed,” said she,
“to reveal my own folly; yet I dare not refuse a satisfaction of this
kind to a person who has laid me under such signal obligations.”

She then proceeded to relate her story, by which it appeared, she was
no other than the fair and unhappy Elenor, whom the artful Fathom had
debauched upon his first arrival in town, in the manner already
described in these memoirs. “Heaven,” continued she, “was pleased to
restore the use of my reason, which I had lost when I found myself
abandoned by the Count; but, all my connexion with my own family being
entirely cut off, and every door shut against a poor creature who could
procure no recommendation, except the certificate signed by the
physician of Bedlam, which, instead of introducing me to service, was
an insurmountable objection to my character, I found myself destitute
of all means of subsisting, unless I would condescend to live the
infamous and wretched life of a courtezan, an expedient rendered
palatable by the terrors of want, cooperating with the reflection of
the irretrievable loss I had already sustained. I ask pardon for
offending your chaste ears with this impure confession of my guilt,
which, Heaven knows, I then did, and now do look upon with abhorrence
and detestation. I had already forfeited my innocence, and wanted
resolution to encounter misery and death. Nevertheless, before I could
determine to embrace the condition of a prostitute, I was one day
accosted in the Park by an elderly gentleman who sat down by me upon a
bench, and, taking notice of the despondence which was evident in my
countenance, pressed me to make him acquainted with the nature of my
misfortune. So much sympathy and good sense appeared in his deportment
and conversation, that I gratified his request, and he, in return for
my confidence, saved me from the most horrible part of my prospect, by
taking me into his protection, and reserving me for his own appetite.
In this situation I lived a whole year, until I was deprived of my
keeper by an apoplectic fit, and turned out of doors by his relations,
who did not, however, strip me of the clothes and moveables which I
owed to his bounty. Far from being as yet reconciled to a vicious life,
I resolved to renounce the paths of shame, and, converting my effects
into ready money, hired a small shop, and furnished it with
haberdashery ware, intending to earn an honest livelihood by the sale
of these commodities, together with the plain work in which I hoped to
be employed so soon as my talents should be known. But this scheme did
not answer my expectation. The goods spoiled upon my hands, and, as I
was a stranger in the neighbourhood, nobody would intrust me with any
other business. So that, notwithstanding the most parsimonious economy,
I ran in debt to my landlord, who seized my effects; and an hosier,
from whom I had received some parcels upon credit, took out a writ
against me, by virtue of which I was arrested and imprisoned in the
Marshalsea, where I found my first seducer. Good Heaven! what did I
feel at this unexpected meeting, overwhelmed as I was before with my
own distress! I with a loud scream fainted away, and, when I recovered,
found myself in the arms of Mr. Fathom, who wept over me with great
affliction. All his prospects of gaiety had now vanished, and his heart
was softened by his own misfortunes, to a feeling of another’s woe, as
well as to a due sense of his own guilt. He expressed the deepest
sorrow for having been the occasion of my ruin, endeavoured to comfort
me with a promise of assistance, and indeed, by practising medicine
among the prisoners, made shift to keep us both from starving. But
surely no sinner underwent such severe remorse as that which he
suffered during his imprisonment. From the day of our meeting, I never
once saw him smile; a melancholy cloud continually overhung his
countenance. He numbered the minutes by his groans, he used to start
with horror from his sleep, and, striking his breast, would exclaim, ‘O
Elenor! I am the worst of villains!’ Sometimes he seemed disordered in
his brain, and raved about Renaldo and Monimia. In a word, his mind was
in a dreadful situation, and all his agonies were communicated to me,
whom by this time he had married, in order to make some atonement for
my wrongs. Wretched as he then was, I remembered the accomplished youth
who had captivated my virgin heart, the old impressions still remained,
I saw his penitence, pitied his misfortune, and his wife being dead,
consented to join his fate, the ceremony having been performed by a
fellow-prisoner, who was in orders. Though his hard-hearted creditor
had no other chance of being paid, than that of setting him at liberty,
he lent a deaf ear to all our supplications; and this cruelty
conspiring with the anguish of my husband’s own reflection, affected
his health and spirits to such a degree, that he could no longer earn
the miserable pittance which had hitherto supported our lives. Then our
calamities began to multiply. Indigence and famine stared us in the
face; and it was with the utmost difficulty that we resisted their
attacks, by selling or pledging our wearing apparel, until we were left
almost quite naked, when we found ourselves discharged by an act passed
for the relief of insolvent debtors. This charitable law, which was
intended for a consolation to the wretched, proved to us the most
severe disaster; for we were turned out into the streets, utterly
destitute of food, raiment, and lodging, at a time when Mr. Fathom was
so weakened by his distemper, that he could not stand alone. I
supported him from door to door, imploring the compassion of charitable
Christians, and was at length permitted to shelter him in this
miserable place, where his disease gaining ground, he lay three days in
that deplorable condition, from which he hath now been rescued, though
I fear too late, by your humanity and benevolence.”

She shed a flood of tears at the conclusion of this mournful tale,
which did not fail to affect the whole audience, especially Serafina,
who assured her, that, whatever should happen to her husband, she might
depend upon finding favour and protection, provided her conduct should
correspond with her professions. While this grateful creature kissed
the hand of her kind benefactress, Fathom uttered a groan, began to
stir in the bed, and with a languid voice called upon Elenor, who,
instantly withdrawing the curtain, presented the whole company to his
view. He had now retrieved the use of his perception by the operation
of the blisters, which began to torture him severely; he looked around
him with amazement and affright, and distinguishing the three persons
against whom the chief arrows of his fraud and treachery had been
levelled, he concluded that he was now arrived at the land of departed
souls, and that the shades of those whom he had so grievously injured
were come to see him tormented according to his demerits.

Fraught with this notion, which was confirmed by the bodily pain which
he felt, and the appearance of the clergyman and Joshua, whom he
mistook for the ministers of vengeance, he cried in a tone replete with
horror, “Is there no mercy then for penitence? Is there no pity due to
the miseries I suffered upon earth? Save me, O bountiful Heaven! from
the terrors of everlasting woe; hide me from these dreadful
executioners, whose looks are torture. Forgive me, generous Castilian.
O Renaldo! thou hadst once a tender heart. I dare not lift my eyes to
Serafina! that pattern of human excellence, who fell a victim to my
atrocious guilt; yet her aspect is all mildness and compassion. Hah!
are not these the drops of pity? Yes, they are the tears of mercy. They
fall like refreshing showers upon my drooping soul! Ah, murdered
innocence! wilt thou not intercede for thy betrayer at the throne of
grace!”

Here he was interrupted by Melvil, who with a grave and solemn air
pronounced, “Great hath been thy guilt, unhappy Ferdinand, and great
have been thy sufferings. Yet we come not to insult, but to alleviate
thy distress. Providence hath kindly defeated thy dire intentions,
which we therefore now forgive and transmit to oblivion, whether it be
thy lot to yield up thy spirit immediately, or to survive the dangerous
malady with which thou art at present overwhelmed. Suffer not thyself
to despair; for the mercy of Heaven is infinite; and submit to the
directions of this worthy gentleman, who will employ his skill for thy
recovery, while we shall take care to furnish thee with necessary
attendance. As too much speaking may be prejudicial to thy health, I
dispense with thy reply, and exhort thee to compose thyself to rest.”
So saying, he drew the curtain, and the company retired, leaving Fathom
entranced with wonder.

The next step which Renaldo took for the benefit of this wretched
penitent, was to send for the apothecary, with whom he left a sum of
money to be expended for the convenience of Fathom and his wife; then
he laid injunctions upon the physician to repeat his visits; and that
gentleman, together with the clergyman and Joshua, taking leave of the
others till next day, the Count set out with the ladies and his
father-in-law to the house where they had lodged the preceding night.

The reader may well imagine the conversation of the evening turned
wholly upon the strange occurrence of the day, which seemed to have
been concerted by supernatural prescience, in order to satisfy the
vengeance, and afford matter of triumph to the generosity of those who
had been so grievously injured by the guilty Fathom. Though not one of
them would say that such a miscreant ought to live, yet all concurred
in approving the offices of humanity which had been performed, and even
endeavoured to find specious pretext for vindicating their compassion.
Don Diego said, it would ill become a transgressor like him to withhold
his forgiveness from a sinner who had wronged him. Madam Clement
appealed to the approbation of Heaven, which had undoubtedly directed
them that way, for the purpose they had fulfilled. Serafina observed,
that the crimes of the delinquent were obliterated by his sorrow,
misery, and repentance. Renaldo honestly owned, that, exclusive of
other reasons, he could not deny himself the luxurious enjoyment of
communicating happiness to his fellow-creatures in distress; and each
fervently prayed, that their charity might not be disappointed by the
death of the object.

While they amused themselves in these discussions, Fathom, after having
lain some hours silent, in consequence of Renaldo’s advice, could no
longer suppress the astonishment of his mind, but, addressing himself
to his wife, “O Elenor!” said he, “my delirium is now past; though I
still remember the phantasies of my distempered brain. Among other
reveries, my imagination was regaled with a vision so perfect and
distinct, as to emulate truth and reality. Methought Count de Melvil,
Don Diego de Zelos, and the divine Serafina, the very persons who are
now crying before the throne of Heaven for vengeance against the guilty
Fathom, stood by my bedside, with looks of pity and forgiveness; and
that Renaldo spoke peace to my despairing soul. I heard the words
distinctly. I retain them in my memory. I saw the tears trickle from
Serafina’s eyes. I heard her father utter a compassionate sigh; and
should actually believe that they were personally present, had not I
long ago seen with my own eyes the funeral procession of that young
lady, whose wrongs God pardon; and were I not convinced that such a
meeting could not be effected without the immediate and miraculous
interposition of Heaven. Yet everything I now see corresponds with the
words of Renaldo, which still sound in my ears. When my perception
forsook me, I lay in the most abject misery, among straw; and thou,
poor injured innocence, wast naked and forlorn. Now, I find myself
reposed in a warm, easy, comfortable bed. I see around me the marks of
human charity and care, and the favourable change in thy appearance
glads my poor dejected heart. Say, whence this happy alteration? Do I
really awake from that dream of misery in which we have continued so
long? or do I still utter the extravagant ravings of a distempered
brain?”

Elenor was afraid of imparting at once all the particulars of the happy
change he had undergone, lest they might leave a dangerous impression
upon his fancy, which was not yet duly composed. She contented herself,
therefore, with telling him, that he had been obliged to the humanity
of a gentleman and lady, who chanced to pass that way by accident, and
who, understanding his deplorable case, had furnished him with the
conveniences which he now enjoyed. She then presented to him what the
doctor had directed her to administer, and, admonishing him to commit
his head to the pillow, he was favoured with a breathing sweat, fell
fast asleep, and in a few hours waked again altogether cool and
undisturbed.

It was upon this occasion that his wife explained the circumstances of
that visit which had redeemed him from extremity of wretchedness and
the jaws of death; upon which he started up, and throwing himself upon
his knees, exclaimed, “All-gracious Power! this was the work of thy own
bounteous hand; the voice of my sorrow and repentance hath been heard.
Thou hast inspired my benefactors with more than mortal goodness in my
behalf; how shall I praise thy name! how shall I requite their
generosity! Oh, I am bankrupt to both! yet let me not perish until I
shall have convinced them of my reformation, and seen them enjoying
that felicity which ought to be reserved for such consummate virtue.”

Next day, in the forenoon, he was visited by the physician, whom he now
recollected to have seen at the house of Madam Clement; and, after
having thanked that gentleman for his humanity and care, he earnestly
begged to know by what means Serafina had been preserved. When he was
satisfied in this particular, and given to understand that she was now
happy in the arms of Renaldo, “Blessed be God!” he cried, “for having
defeated the villany of him who sought to part such lovers. Dear sir,
will you add one circumstance to your charity, and bear to that happy
couple, and the noble Don Diego, the respects and the remorse of a
sincere penitent, whom their compassion hath raised to life? I have
been such a traitor to them, that my words deserve no regard. I will
not therefore use professions. I dare not hope to be admitted into
their presence. I am indeed ashamed to see the light of the sun. How
then could I bear the looks of that injured family? ah, no! let me hide
myself in some obscure retreat, where I may work out my salvation with
fear and trembling, and pray incessantly to Heaven for their
prosperity.”

The physician promised to represent his contrition to the Count and his
lady, and accordingly proceeded to their habitation, where he repeated
these expressions, and pronounced his patient out of danger. So that
their thoughts were now employed in concerting a scheme for his future
subsistence, that he might not be exposed by indigence to a relapse in
point of morals. Renaldo being still averse to any personal intercourse
with such a wretch, until he should give some undoubted proofs of
amendment, and, as yet afraid of intrusting him with any office that
required integrity, resolved, with the approbation of all present, to
settle him in a cheap county in the north of England, where he and his
wife could live comfortably on an annuity of sixty pounds, until his
behaviour should entitle him to a better provision.

This resolution was just taken, when Joshua arrived with a gentleman
whom he introduced to Don Diego as the secretary of the Spanish
ambassador. After the first compliments, the stranger told the
Castilian, that he waited upon him at the desire of his Excellency, who
would have come in person, had he not been confined by the gout. Then
he put into his hand a letter from the court of Madrid, written by a
nobleman of Diego’s acquaintance, who informed him, that Don Manuel de
Mendoza having made away with himself by poison, in order to avoid the
disgrace of a legal conviction, his Catholic Majesty was now convinced
of Don Diego’s innocence, and granted him leave to return and take
possession of his honours and estate. This information was confirmed by
the secretary, who assured him that the ambassador had orders to make
him acquainted with this favourable decision of the King. The Castilian
having first acquitted himself in the most polite terms to the
secretary and the Jew, who, he said, had always been a messenger of
glad tidings, communicated his happiness to the company; and this
evening concluded the third day of their rejoicing.

Next morning Don Diego went to visit the ambassador, accompanied by
Joshua and the secretary; while the physician, repairing to the
habitation of Fathom, signified, by Renaldo’s direction, the resolution
which had been taken in his behalf; and the patient no sooner heard his
doom, than, lifting up his hands, he cried, “I am unworthy of such
tenderness and benevolence.” While Elenor shed a flood of tears in
silence, unable to give utterance to her grateful thought; Melvil’s
bounty having so far transcended her most sanguine hope.

The Spaniard having paid his devoirs to his Excellency, returned before
dinner; and, in the afternoon, desiring a private conference with
Serafina, they retired into another apartment, and he expressed himself
to this effect: “You have contracted, my dear child, an habit of
calling Madam Clement your mother, and doubtless, by her maternal
tenderness and regard, she hath acquired a just title to the
appellation. Yet I own I would fain strengthen it by a legal claim. I
no sooner retrieved my daughter than I gave her away to the most
deserving youth that ever sighed with love.—I rejoice in the gift which
secured your happiness. But I left myself in a solitary situation,
which even the return of my good fortune cannot render easy and
supportable. When I revisit the Castle of Zelos, every well-known
object will recall the memory of my Antonia, and I shall want a
companion to fill her place, and to sympathise with me in that sorrow
which will be derived from my remembrance. Who is there so worthy to
succeed your mother in the affection of Don Diego, as she who interests
her love for Serafina, and resembles her so strongly in every virtue of
the sex? Similar attractions will produce similar effects. My heart is
already attached to that good lady; and, provided Serafina shall
approve of my choice, I will lay myself and fortune at her feet.”

The fair Countess replied, with an enchanting smile, that, before this
declaration, she had with pleasure perceived the progress which Madam
Clement had made in his heart; and that she did not believe there was a
person upon earth better qualified to repair the loss he had sustained;
though she foresaw one obstacle to his happiness, which she was afraid
would not be easily surmounted. “You mean,” answered the Castilian,
“the difference of religion, which I am resolved to remove by adopting
the Protestant faith; though I am fully satisfied that real goodness is
of no particular persuasion, and that salvation cannot depend upon
belief, over which the will has no influence. I invest you, therefore,
with the charge of declaring my passion and proposal, and empower you
to satisfy her scruples with regard to the religion which I now
profess, and which I shall not openly relinquish, until I shall have
secured, in this country, effects sufficient to screen me from the ill
consequences of my King’s displeasure.”

Serafina undertook this office with pleasure, because she had reason to
think his addresses would not be disagreeable to Madam Clement; and
that same night made the Count acquainted with the nature of her
commission. Nor was her expectation disappointed. The French lady, with
that frankness which is peculiar to virtue and good breeding, confessed
that Don Diego was not indifferent to her choice, and did not hesitate
in receiving him upon the footing of a lover.—As we have already dwelt
circumstantially on the passion of love, so as perhaps even to have
tired our readers, we shall not repeat the dialogue that passed, when
the Spaniard was indulged with an opportunity to explain his
sentiments. Suffice it to observe, that the lady’s days of coquetry
were now over, and that she was too wise to trifle with the time, which
every moment became more and more precious. It was agreed then, that
Don Diego should settle his affairs in Spain, and return to England, in
order to espouse Madam Clement, with a view to fix his residence in
this island, where Renaldo likewise proposed to enjoy the sweets of his
fortune, provided he could draw hither his interests and connexions.

Meanwhile, having for some days enjoyed his bliss with all the fulness
of rapture amidst this small but agreeable society, he shifted the
scene, and conducted his dear partner to a ready-furnished house in
town, which, together with an occasional equipage, his friend Joshua
had hired for the accommodation of him and his father-in-law, who,
during his stay in England, failed not to cultivate the mistress of his
heart with the most punctual assiduity. Hitherto Serafina had been as a
precious jewel locked up in a casket, which the owner alone had an
opportunity to contemplate. But now the Count, who was proud of such a
prize, resolved to let her shine forth to the admiration of the whole
world. With this view he bespoke such ornaments as befitted her
quality, and, while the mantua-makers were employed in her service,
made a tour among his former acquaintance, and discharged the
obligations under which he lay to some who had assisted him in his
distress. He did not, however, introduce them to his charming Serafina;
because not one of them had formerly treated her with that delicacy of
regard which he thought her due; and some of them were much mortified
at their neglect, when they saw what a dazzling figure she made in the
beau monde.

She was visited by the Spanish and Imperial ambassadors, and divers
other foreigners of distinction, to whom Melvil had letters of
recommendation. But her first public appearance was in a box at the
opera, accompanied by Madam Clement, the Count, and Don Diego. The
entertainment was already begun, so that her entrance had the greater
effect upon the audience, whose attention was soon detached from the
performance, and riveted upon this amiable apparition, which seemed to
be some bright being of another world dropped from the clouds among
them. Then did the spirit of curiosity play its part. A thousand
whispers circulated; as many glasses were exalted to reconnoitre this
box of foreigners; for such they concluded them to be from their
appearance. Every male spectator acknowledged Serafina to be the
paragon of beauty; and every female confessed, that Melvil was the
model of a fine gentleman. The charms of the young Countess did not
escape the eye and approbation of royalty itself; and when her rank was
known, from the information of the ambassadors and other people of
condition who were seen saluting her at a distance, that same evening a
thousand bumpers were swallowed in honour of the Countess de Melvil.
The fame of her beauty was immediately extended over this immense
metropolis, and different schemes were concerted for bringing her into
life. These, however, she resisted with unwearied obstinacy. Her
happiness centred in Renaldo, and the cultivation of a few friends
within the shade of domestic quiet. She did not even forget the
concerns of the wretched Fathom and his faithful Elenor, who daily
enjoyed fresh instances of her humanity and care. When his fever
forsook him, he was supplied with nourishing food for the recovery of
his health; and as soon as he found himself in a condition to travel,
he gave notice to his benefactor, who desired Joshua to settle with him
the manner in which he was to receive his allowance, and to pay the
first half-year’s salary per advance.

This affair being adjusted, and the place of his retreat signified, the
Jew told Elenor, that she might wait upon the Countess before their
departure; and she did not fail to make use of this permission. After
they had made the necessary preparations for their journey, and taken
places in the York stage-coach, Mrs. Fathom, clothing herself in decent
apparel, went to the house of Count Melvil, and was immediately
admitted to the presence of Serafina, who received her with her usual
complacency, enriched her with salutary advice, comforted her with the
hope of better things, provided her conduct and that of her husband
should henceforth be found irreproachable; and, wishing her peace and
happiness, presented her with a box of linen, and twenty guineas in a
purse. Such excessive goodness overpowered this sensible young woman to
such a degree, that she stood before her in speechless awe and
veneration; and the Countess, in order to relieve her from the
confusion under which she suffered, quitted the room, leaving her to
the care of her woman. It was not long, however, before her gratitude
broke out in loud exclamations and a violent passion of tears, which
all her efforts could not, for a while, overcome. By this time the
coach was brought up to the gate for the reception of Serafina, who
took an airing every day at the same hour; when Renaldo, leading her to
the vehicle, beheld a man plainly dressed standing within the court,
with his head and body bent towards the earth, so that his countenance
could not be perceived.

Melvil, who supposed him to be some unfortunate man come to implore his
charity, turned towards him, and asked with a humane accent, if he
wanted to speak with any person in the house? To this interrogation the
stranger replied, without lifting up his head, “Overwhelmed as I am
with Count Melvil’s generosity, together with a consciousness of my own
unworthiness, it ill becomes a wretch like me to importune him for
further favour; yet I could not bear the thought of withdrawing,
perhaps for ever, from the presence of my benefactor, without
soliciting his permission to see his face in mercy, to acknowledge my
atrocious crimes, to hear my pardon confirmed by his voice, and that of
his accomplished Countess, whom I dare not even at a distance behold;
and to express my fervent wish for their prosperity.”

Melvil, whose heart was but too tender, could not hear this address
without emotion. He recognised the companion of his infancy and youth;
he remembered the happy scenes he had enjoyed with Fathom, whose voice
had always such an effect upon his ear, as to excite the ideas of
friendship and esteem; and he was disturbed by this unexpected meeting,
which also discomposed the beauteous Serafina. Renaldo having paused a
little, “It is with pain,” said he, “I recollect anything to the
prejudice of Fathom, whose future behaviour will, I hope, erase the
memory of his offences, and justify what other steps I may take in his
favour. Meanwhile, I heartily forgive what is past; and, in token of my
sincerity, present my hand;” which our adventurer bathed with his
tears. The Countess, whose mind was in unison with her husband,
repeated her assurances of pardon and protection; at which the penitent
rejoiced in silence, while he raised his head and took a parting view
of those charms which had formerly enslaved his heart.

Having thus obeyed the dictates of his duty and inclination, he next
morning embarked in the stage-coach, with his faithful Elenor, and in
six days arrived at the place of his retreat, which he found extremely
well adapted to the circumstances of his mind and fortune. For all his
vice and ambition was now quite mortified within him, and his whole
attention engrossed in atoning for his former crimes, by a sober and
penitent life, by which alone he could deserve the uncommon generosity
of his patrons.

While he thus accommodated himself to his new system, Renaldo received
letters of congratulation from his sister, who with the Major had come
to Brussels, in order to meet her brother and Serafina, according to
his proposal. This intimation being communicated to Don Diego, he
resolved to accompany them to Flanders, on his way to Spain.
Preparations were made for their departure; the clergyman and physician
were honoured with valuable marks of friendship and esteem from the
Countess, Renaldo, and the Castilian, who were convoyed to Deal by
Madam Clement, to whom, at parting, Don Diego presented a diamond ring,
as a pledge of his inviolable love.

Here the travellers hired a vessel for Ostend, which they reached in a
few hours; in two days more they arrived at Brussels, where Mrs. Farrel
and her husband were struck with admiration at the surprising beauty
and accomplishment of their sister-in-law, whom they caressed with
equal tenderness and joy.—In a word, all parties were as happy as good
fortune could make them; and Don Diego set out for Spain, after they
had agreed to reside in the Low Countries till his return.

THE END.






*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ADVENTURES OF FERDINAND COUNT FATHOM — COMPLETE ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


﻿The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Expedition of Humphry Clinker
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Expedition of Humphry Clinker

Author: T. Smollett

Release date: April 1, 2000 [eBook #2160]
                Most recently updated: July 25, 2012

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Martin Adamson, Andreas Philipp, and David Widger


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE EXPEDITION OF HUMPHRY CLINKER ***




Produced by Martin Adamson and  Andreas Philipp






THE EXPEDITION OF HUMPHRY CLINKER

by TOBIAS SMOLLETT




To Mr HENRY DAVIS, Bookseller, in London.

ABERGAVENNY, Aug. 4.

RESPECTED SIR,

I have received your esteemed favour of the 13th ultimo, whereby it
appeareth, that you have perused those same Letters, the which were
delivered unto you by my friend, the reverend Mr Hugo Behn; and I am
pleased to find you think they may be printed with a good prospect of
success; in as much as the objections you mention, I humbly conceive,
are such as may be redargued, if not entirely removed--And, first, in
the first place, as touching what prosecutions may arise from printing
the private correspondence of persons still living, give me leave, with
all due submission, to observe, that the Letters in question were not
written and sent under the seal of secrecy; that they have no tendency
to the mala fama, or prejudice of any person whatsoever; but rather to
the information and edification of mankind: so that it becometh a sort
of duty to promulgate them in usum publicum. Besides, I have consulted
Mr Davy Higgins, an eminent attorney of this place, who, after due
inspection and consideration, declareth, That he doth not think the said
Letters contain any matter which will be held actionable in the eye of
the law. Finally, if you and I should come to a right understanding, I
do declare in verbo sacerdotis, that, in case of any such prosecution,
I will take the whole upon my own shoulders, even quoad fine and
imprisonment, though, I must confess, I should not care to undergo
flagellation: Tam ad turpitudinem, quam ad amaritudinem poenoe
spectans--Secondly, concerning the personal resentment of Mr Justice
Lismahago, I may say, non flocci facio--I would not willingly vilipend
any Christian, if, peradventure, he deserveth that epithet: albeit, I
am much surprised that more care is not taken to exclude from the
commission all such vagrant foreigners as may be justly suspected of
disaffection to our happy constitution, in church and state--God forbid
that I should be so uncharitable, as to affirm, positively, that the
said Lismahago is no better than a Jesuit in disguise; but this I will
assert and maintain, totis viribus, that, from the day he qualified, he
has never been once seen intra templi parietes, that is to say, within
the parish church.

Thirdly, with respect to what passed at Mr Kendal's table, when the said
Lismahago was so brutal in his reprehensions, I must inform you, my good
Sir, that I was obliged to retire, not by fear arising from his minatory
reproaches, which, as I said above, I value not of a rush; but from the
sudden effect produced, by a barbel's row, which I had eaten at
dinner, not knowing, that the said row is at certain seasons violently
cathartic, as Galen observeth in his chapter Peri ichtos.

Fourthly, and lastly, with reference to the manner in which I got
possession of these Letters, it is a circumstance that concerns my own
conscience only; sufficeth it to say, I have fully satisfied the parties
in whose custody they were; and, by this time, I hope I have also
satisfied you in such ways, that the last hand may be put to our
agreement, and the work proceed with all convenient expedition; in which
I hope I rest,

Respected Sir, Your very humble servant,

JONATHAN DUSTWICH.

P.S. I propose, Deo volente, to have the pleasure of seeing you in the
great city, towards All-hallowtide, when I shall be glad to treat with
you concerning a parcel of MS. sermons, of a certain clergyman deceased;
a cake of the right leaven, for the present taste of the public. Verbum
sapienti, &c.

J.D.




To the Revd. Mr JONATHAN DUSTWICH, at--

SIR,

I received yours in course of post, and shall be glad to treat with you
for the M.S. which I have delivered to your friend Mr Behn; but can
by no means comply with the terms proposed. Those things are so
uncertain--Writing is all a lottery--I have been a loser by the works
of the greatest men of the age--I could mention particulars, and name
names; but don't choose it--The taste of the town is so changeable.
Then there have been so many letters upon travels lately published--What
between Smollett's, Sharp's, Derrick's, Thicknesse's, Baltimore's, and
Baretti's, together with Shandy's Sentimental Travels, the public seems
to be cloyed with that kind of entertainment--Nevertheless, I will,
if you please, run the risque of printing and publishing, and you shall
have half the profits of the impression--You need not take the trouble
to bring up your sermons on my account--No body reads sermons but
Methodists and Dissenters--Besides, for my own part, I am quite a
stranger to that sort of reading; and the two persons, whose judgment I
depended upon in those matters, are out of the way; one is gone abroad,
carpenter of a man of war; and the other, has been silly enough to
abscond, in order to avoid a prosecution for blasphemy--I'm a great
loser by his going off--He has left a manual of devotion half finished
on my hands, after having received money for the whole copy--He was the
soundest divine, and had the most orthodox pen of all my people; and I
never knew his judgment fail, but in flying from his bread and butter on
this occasion.

By owning you was not put in bodily fear by Lismahago, you preclude
yourself from the benefit of a good plea, over and above the advantage
of binding him over. In the late war, I inserted in my evening paper,
a paragraph that came by the post, reflecting upon the behaviour of a
certain regiment in battle. An officer of said regiment came to my shop,
and, in the presence of my wife and journeyman, threatened to cut off
my ears--As I exhibited marks of bodily fear more ways than one, to the
conviction of the byestanders, I bound him over; my action lay, and I
recovered. As for flagellation, you have nothing to fear, and nothing to
hope, on that head--There has been but one printer flogged at the cart's
tail these thirty years; that was Charles Watson; and he assured me it
was no more than a flea-bite. C-- S-- has been threatened several times
by the House of L--; but it came to nothing. If an information should
be moved for, and granted against you, as the editor of those Letters,
I hope you will have honesty and wit enough to appear and take your
trial--If you should be sentenced to the pillory, your fortune is
made--As times go, that's a sure step to honour and preferment. I shall
think myself happy if I can lend you a lift; and am, very sincerely,

Yours,

HENRY DAVIS. LONDON, Aug. 10th.

Please my kind service to your neighbour, my cousin Madoc--I have
sent an Almanack and Court-kalendar, directed for him at Mr Sutton's,
bookseller, in Gloucester, carriage paid, which he will please to accept
as a small token of my regard. My wife, who is very fond of toasted
cheese, presents her compliments to him, and begs to know if there's any
of that kind, which he was so good as to send us last Christmas, to be
sold in London.

H. D.




THE EXPEDITION OF HUMPHRY CLINKER




To Dr LEWIS.

DOCTOR,

The pills are good for nothing--I might as well swallow snowballs to
cool my reins--I have told you over and over how hard I am to move; and
at this time of day, I ought to know something of my own constitution.
Why will you be so positive? Prithee send me another prescription--I am
as lame and as much tortured in all my limbs as if I was broke upon the
wheel: indeed, I am equally distressed in mind and body--As if I had not
plagues enough of my own, those children of my sister are left me for a
perpetual source of vexation--what business have people to get children
to plague their neighbours? A ridiculous incident that happened
yesterday to my niece Liddy, has disordered me in such a manner, that
I expect to be laid up with another fit of the gout--perhaps, I may
explain myself in my next. I shall set out tomorrow morning for the
Hot Well at Bristol, where I am afraid I shall stay longer than I could
wish. On the receipt of this send Williams thither with my saddle-horse
and the demi pique. Tell Barns to thresh out the two old ricks, and send
the corn to market, and sell it off to the poor at a shilling a bushel
under market price.--I have received a snivelling letter from Griffin,
offering to make a public submission and pay costs. I want none of his
submissions, neither will I pocket any of his money. The fellow is a bad
neighbour, and I desire, to have nothing to do with him: but as he is
purse-proud, he shall pay for his insolence: let him give five pounds to
the poor of the parish, and I will withdraw my action; and in the mean
time you may tell Prig to stop proceedings.--Let Morgan's widow have the
Alderney cow, and forty shillings to clothe her children: but don't say
a syllable of the matter to any living soul--I'll make her pay when she
is able. I desire you will lock up all my drawers, and keep the keys
till meeting; and be sure you take the iron chest with my papers into
your own custody--Forgive all, this trouble from,

Dear Lewis, Your affectionate M. BRAMBLE GLOUCESTER, April 2.




To Mrs GWYLLIM, house-keeper at Brambleton-hall.

MRS GWILLIM,

When this cums to hand, be sure to pack up in the trunk male that stands
in my closet; to be sent me in the Bristol waggon without loss of time,
the following articles, viz. my rose collard neglejay with green robins,
my yellow damask, and my black velvets with the short hoop; my bloo
quilted petticot, my green mantel, my laced apron, my French commode,
Macklin head and lappets and the litel box with my jowls. Williams may
bring over my bum-daffee, and the viol with the easings of Dr Hill's
dockwater and Chowder's lacksitif. The poor creature has been terribly
stuprated ever since we left huom. Pray take particular care of the
house while the family is absent. Let there be a fire constantly kept in
my brother's chamber and mine. The maids, having nothing to do, may be
sat a spinning. I desire you'll clap a pad-luck on the wind-seller, and
let none of the men have excess to the strong bear--don't forget to have
the gate shit every evening be dark--The gardnir and the hind may lie
below in the landry, to partake the house, with the blunderbuss and the
great dog; and hope you'll have a watchful eye over the maids. I know
that hussy Mary Jones, loves to be rumping with the men. Let me know
Alderney's calf be sould yet, and what he fought--if the ould goose be
sitting; and if the cobler has cut Dicky, and how pore anemil bore the
operation. No more at present, but rests,

Yours, TABITHA BRAMBLE GLOSTAR, April 2.


TO Mrs MARY JONES, at Brambleton-hall.

DEAR MOLLY,

Heaving this importunity, I send, my love to you and Saul, being in good
health, and hoping to hear the same from you; and that you and Saul will
take my poor kitten to bed with you this cold weather. We have been all
in, a sad taking here at Glostar--Miss Liddy had like to have run away
with a player-man, and young master and he would adone themselves a
mischief; but the squire applied to the mare, and they were, bound
over.--Mistress bid me not speak a word of the matter to any Christian
soul--no more I shall; for, we servints should see all and say nothing--
But what was worse than all this, Chowder has had the misfortune to be
worried by a butcher's dog, and came home in a terrible pickle--Mistress
was taken with the asterisks, but they soon went off. The doctor was
sent for to Chowder, and he subscribed a repository which did him great
service--thank God he's now in a fair way to do well--pray take care
of my box and the pillyber and put them under your own bed; for, I do
suppose madam, Gwyllim will be a prying into my secrets, now my back is
turned. John Thomas is in good health, but sulky. The squire gave away
an ould coat to a poor man; and John says as, how 'tis robbing him of
his perquisites.--I told him, by his agreement he was to receive
no vails; but he says as how there's a difference betwixt vails and
perquisites; and so there is for sartain. We are all going to the Hot
Well, where I shall drink your health in a glass of water, being,

Dear Molly, Your humble servant to command, W. JENKINS GLOSTAR, April
2nd.




To Sir WATKIN PHILLIPS, Bart. of Jesus college, Oxon.

DEAR PHILLIPS,

As I have nothing more at heart than to convince you I am incapable of
forgetting, or neglecting the friendship I made at college, now begin
that correspondence by letters, which you and I agreed, at parting, to
cultivate. I begin it sooner than I intended, that you may have it in
your power to refute any idle reports which may be circulated to my
prejudice at Oxford, touching a foolish quarrel, in which I have been
involved on account of my sister, who had been some time settled here
in a boarding-school. When I came hither with my uncle and aunt (who
are our guardians) to fetch her away, I found her a fine tall girl, of
seventeen, with an agreeable person; but remarkably simple, and quite
ignorant of the world. This disposition, and want of experience, had
exposed her to the addresses of a person--I know not what to call
him, who had seen her at a play; and, with a confidence and dexterity
peculiar to himself, found means to be recommended to her acquaintance.
It was by the greatest accident I intercepted one of his letters; as
it was my duty to stifle this correspondence in its birth, I made it my
business to find him out, and tell him very freely my sentiments of
the matter. The spark did not like the stile I used, and behaved with
abundance of mettle. Though his rank in life (which, by the bye, I am
ashamed to declare) did not entitle him to much deference; yet as his
behaviour was remarkably spirited, I admitted him to the privilege of
a gentleman, and something might have happened, had not we been
prevented.--In short, the business took air, I know not how, and made
abundance of noise--recourse was had to justice--I was obliged to give
my word and honour, &c. and to-morrow morning we set out for Bristol
Wells, where I expect to hear from you by the return of the post.--I
have got into a family of originals, whom I may one day attempt to
describe for your amusement. My aunt, Mrs Tabitha Bramble, is a maiden
of forty-five, exceedingly starched, vain, and ridiculous.--My uncle is
an odd kind of humorist, always on the fret, and so unpleasant in his
manner, that rather than be obliged to keep him company, I'd resign all
claim to the inheritance of his estate. Indeed his being tortured by the
gout may have soured his temper, and, perhaps, I may like him better on
further acquaintance; certain it is, all his servants and neighbours in
the country are fond of him, even to a degree of enthusiasm, the reason
of which I cannot as yet comprehend. Remember me to Griffy Price, Gwyn,
Mansel, Basset, and all the rest of my old Cambrian companions.--Salute
the bedmaker in my name--give my service to the cook, and pray take care
of poor Ponto, for the sake of his old master, who is, and ever will be,

Dear Phillips, Your affectionate friend, and humble servant, JER.
MELFORD GLOUCESTER, April 2.




To Mrs JERMYN at her house in Gloucester.

DEAR MADAM,

Having no mother of my own, I hope you will give me leave to disburden
my poor heart to you, who have always acted the part of a kind parent to
me, ever since I was put under your care. Indeed, and indeed, my worthy
governess may believe me, when I assure her, that I never harboured
a thought that was otherwise than virtuous; and, if God will give me
grace, I shall never behave so as to cast a reflection on the care you
have taken in my education. I confess I have given just cause of offence
by my want of prudence and experience. I ought not to have listened to
what the young man said; and it was my duty to have told you all that
passed, but I was ashamed to mention it; and then he behaved so modest
and respectful, and seemed to be so melancholy and timorous, that
I could not find in my heart to do any thing that should make him
miserable and desperate. As for familiarities, I do declare, I never
once allowed him the favour of a: salute; and as to the few letters that
passed between us, they are all in my uncle's hands, and I hope they
contain nothing contrary to innocence and honour.--I am still persuaded
that he is not what he appears to be: but time will discover--mean while
I will endeavour to forget a connexion, which is so displeasing to my
family. I have cried without ceasing, and have not tasted any thing but
tea, since I was hurried away from you; nor did I once close my eyes for
three nights running.--My aunt continues to chide me severely when we
are by ourselves; but I hope to soften her in time, by humility
and submission.--My uncle, who was so dreadfully passionate in the
beginning, has been moved by my tears and distress; and is now all
tenderness and compassion; and my brother is reconciled to me on my
promise to break off all correspondence with that unfortunate youth;
but, notwithstanding all their indulgence, I shall have no peace of mind
till I know my dear and ever honoured governess has forgiven her poor,
disconsolate, forlorn,

Affectionate humble servant, till death, LYDIA MELFORD CLIFTON, April 6.




To Miss LAETITIA WILLIS, at Gloucester.

MY DEAREST LETTY,

I am in such a fright, lest this should not come safe to hand by the
conveyance of Jarvis the carrier, that I beg you will write me, on the
receipt of it, directing to me, under cover, to Mrs Winifred Jenkins,
my aunt's maid, who is a good girl, and has been so kind to me in my
affliction, that I have made her my confidant; as for Jarvis, he was
very shy of taking charge of my letter and the little parcel, because
his sister Sally had like to have lost her place on my account: indeed
I cannot blame the man for his caution; but I have made it worth his
while.--My dear companion and bed-fellow, it is a grievous addition to
my other misfortunes, that I am deprived of your agreeable company and
conversation, at a time when I need so much the comfort of your good
humour and good sense; but, I hope, the friendship we contracted at
boarding-school, will last for life--I doubt not but on my side it will
daily increase and improve, as I gain experience, and learn to know the
value of a true friend. O, my dear Letty! what shall I say about poor
Mr Wilson? I have promised to break off all correspondence, and, if
possible, to forget him: but, alas! I begin to perceive that will not be
in my power. As it is by no means proper that the picture should remain
in my hands, lest it should be the occasion of more mischief, I have
sent it to you by this opportunity, begging you will either keep it safe
till better times, or return it to Mr Wilson himself, who, I suppose,
will make it his business to see you at the usual place. If he should be
low-spirited at my sending back his picture, you may tell him I have no
occasion for a picture, while the original continues engraved on my--But
no; I would not have you tell him that neither; because there must be an
end of our correspondence--I wish he may forget me, for the sake of
his own peace; and yet if he should, he must be a barbarous--But it is
impossible--poor Wilson cannot be false and inconstant: I beseech
him not to write to me, nor attempt to see me for some time; for,
considering the resentment and passionate temper of my brother Jery,
such an attempt might be attended with consequences which would make
us all miserable for life--let us trust to time and the chapter of
accidents; or rather to that Providence which will not fail, sooner or
later, to reward those that walk in the paths of honour and virtue. I
would offer my love to the young ladies; but it is not fit that any of
them should know you have received this letter.--If we go to Bath,
I shall send you my simple remarks upon that famous center of polite
amusement, and every other place we may chance to visit; and I flatter
myself that my dear Miss Willis will be punctual in answering the
letters of her affectionate,

LYDIA MELFORD CLIFTON, April 6.




To Dr LEWIS.

DEAR LEWIS,

I have followed your directions with some success, and might have
been upon my legs by this time, had the weather permitted me to use my
saddle-horse. I rode out upon the Downs last Tuesday, in the forenoon,
when the sky, as far as the visible horizon, was without a cloud; but
before I had gone a full mile, I was overtaken instantaneously by a
storm of rain that wet me to the skin in three minutes--whence it came
the devil knows; but it has laid me up (I suppose) for one fortnight.
It makes me sick to hear people talk of the fine air upon Clifton-downs:
How can the air be either agreeable or salutary, where the demon of
vapours descends in a perpetual drizzle? My confinement is the more
intolerable, as I am surrounded with domestic vexations. My niece has
had a dangerous fit of illness, occasioned by that cursed incident at
Gloucester, which I mentioned in my last.--She is a poor good-natured
simpleton, as soft as butter, and as easily melted--not that she's a
fool--the girl's parts are not despicable, and her education has not
been neglected; that is to say, she can write and spell, and speak
French, and play upon the harpsichord; then she dances finely, has a
good figure, and is very well inclined; but, she's deficient in spirit,
and so susceptible--and so tender forsooth!--truly, she has got a
languishing eye, and reads romances.--Then there's her brother, 'squire
Jery, a pert jackanapes, full of college-petulance and self-conceit;
proud as a German count, and as hot and hasty as a Welch mountaineer. As
for that fantastical animal, my sister Tabby, you are no stranger to her
qualifications--I vow to God, she is sometimes so intolerable, that I
almost think she's the devil incarnate come to torment me for my
sins; and yet I am conscious of no sins that ought to entail such
family-plagues upon me--why the devil should not I shake off these
torments at once? I an't married to Tabby, thank Heaven! nor did I beget
the other two: let them choose another guardian: for my part I an't in
a condition to take care of myself; much less to superintend the
conduct of giddy-headed boys and girls. You earnestly desire to know the
particulars of our adventure at Gloucester, which are briefly these, and
I hope they will go no further:--Liddy had been so long copped up in a
boarding-school, which, next to a nunnery, is the worst kind of seminary
that ever was contrived for young women, that she became as inflammable
as touch-wood; and going to a play in holiday-time,--'sdeath, I'm
ashamed to tell you! she fell in love with one of the actors--a handsome
young fellow that goes by the name of Wilson. The rascal soon perceived
the impression he had made, and managed matters so as to see her at
a house where she went to drink tea with her governess.--This was the
beginning of a correspondence, which they kept up by means of a jade
of a milliner, who made and dressed caps for the girls at the
boarding-school. When we arrived at Gloucester, Liddy came to stay at
lodgings with her aunt, and Wilson bribed the maid to deliver a letter
into her own hands; but it seems Jery had already acquired so much
credit with the maid (by what means he best knows) that she carried
the letter to him, and so the whole plot was discovered. The rash boy,
without saying a word of the matter to me, went immediately in search
of Wilson; and, I suppose, treated him with insolence enough. The
theatrical hero was too far gone in romance to brook such usage: he
replied in blank verse, and a formal challenge ensued. They agreed to
meet early next morning and decide the dispute with sword and pistol. I
heard nothing at all of the affair, till Mr Morley came to my bed-side
in the morning, and told me he was afraid my nephew was going to fight,
as he had been overheard talking very loud and vehement with Wilson
at the young man's lodgings the night before, and afterwards went
and bought powder and ball at a shop in the neighbourhood. I got up
immediately, and upon inquiry found he was just going out. I begged
Morley to knock up the mayor, that he might interpose as a magistrate,
and in the mean time I hobbled after the squire, whom I saw at a
distance walking at a great pace towards the city gate--in spite of all
my efforts, I could not come up till our two combatants had taken their
ground, and were priming their pistols. An old house luckily screened
me from their view; so that I rushed upon them at once, before I was
perceived. They were both confounded, and attempted to make their escape
different ways; but Morley coming up with constables, at that instant,
took Wilson into custody, and Jery followed him quietly to the mayor's
house. All this time I was ignorant of what had passed the preceding
day; and neither of the parties would discover a tittle of the matter.
The mayor observed that it was great presumption in Wilson, who was a
stroller, to proceed to such extremities with a gentleman of family and
fortune; and threatened to commit him on the vagrant act.--The young
fellow bustled up with great spirit, declaring he was a gentleman, and
would be treated as such; but he refused to explain himself further. The
master of the company being sent for, and examined, touching the said
Wilson, said the young man had engaged with him at Birmingham about six
months ago; but never would take his salary; that he had behaved so well
in his private character, as to acquire the respect and good-will of all
his acquaintance, and that the public owned his merit as an actor was
altogether extraordinary.--After all, I fancy, he will turn out to be a
run-away prentice from London.--The manager offered to bail him for any
sum, provided he would give his word and honour that he would keep the
peace; but the young gentleman was on his high ropes, and would by no
means lay himself under any restrictions: on the other hand, Hopeful was
equally obstinate; till at length the mayor declared, that if they
both refused to be bound over, he would immediately commit Wilson as a
vagrant to hard labour. I own I was much pleased with Jery's behaviour
on this occasion: he said, that rather than Mr Wilson should be treated
in such an ignominious manner, he would give his word and honour
to prosecute the affair no further while they remained at
Gloucester--Wilson thanked him for his generous manner of proceeding,
and was discharged. On our return to our lodgings, my nephew explained
the whole mystery; and I own I was exceedingly incensed--Liddy being
questioned on the subject, and very severely reproached by that wildcat
my sister Tabby, first swooned away, then dissolving in a flood of
tears, confessed all the particulars of the correspondence, at the same
time giving up three letters, which was all she had received from her
admirer. The last, which Jery intercepted, I send you inclosed, and when
you have read it, I dare say you won't wonder at the progress the writer
had made in the heart of a simple girl, utterly unacquainted with the
characters of mankind. Thinking it was high time to remove her from such
a dangerous connexion, I carried her off the very next day to Bristol;
but the poor creature was so frightened and fluttered, by our threats
and expostulations, that she fell sick the fourth day after our arrival
at Clifton, and continued so ill for a whole week, that her life was
despaired of. It was not till yesterday that Dr Rigge declared her out
of danger. You cannot imagine what I have suffered, partly from the
indiscretion of this poor child, but much more from the fear of
losing her entirely. This air is intolerably cold, and the place quite
solitary--I never go down to the Well without returning low-spirited;
for there I meet with half a dozen poor emaciated creatures, with
ghostly looks, in the last stage of a consumption, who have made shift
to linger through the winter like so many exotic plants languishing in a
hot-house; but in all appearance, will drop into their graves before
the sun has warmth enough to mitigate the rigour of this ungenial
spring.--If you think the Bath-water will be of any service to me, I
will go thither so soon as my niece can bear the motion of the coach.
Tell Barns I am obliged to him for his advice; but don't choose to
follow it. If Davis voluntarily offers to give up the farm, the other
shall have it; but I will not begin at this time of day to distress my
tenants, because they are unfortunate, and cannot make regular payments:
I wonder that Barns should think me capable of such oppression--As for
Higgins, the fellow is a notorious poacher, to be sure; and an impudent
rascal to set his snares in my own paddock; but, I suppose, he thought
he had some right (especially in my absence) to partake of what nature
seems to have intended for common use--you may threaten him in my name,
as much as you please, and if he repeats the offence, let me know it
before you have recourse to justice.--I know you are a great sportsman,
and oblige many of your friends: I need not tell you to make use of my
grounds; but it may be necessary to hint, that I am more afraid of my
fowling-piece than of my game. When you can spare two or three brace of
partridges, send them over by the stagecoach, and tell Gwyllim that she
forgot to pack up my flannel and wide shoes in the trunk-mail--I shall
trouble you as usual, from time to time, till at last I suppose you will
be tired of corresponding with

Your assured friend, M. BRAMBLE CLIFTON, April 17.




To Miss LYDIA MELFORD.

Miss Willis has pronounced my doom--you are going away, dear Miss
Melford!--you are going to be removed, I know not whither! what shall I
do? which way shall I turn for consolation? I know not what I say--all
night long have I been tossed in a sea of doubts and fears, uncertainty
and distraction, without being able to connect my thoughts, much less to
form any consistent plan of conduct--I was even tempted to wish that
I had never seen you; or that you had been less amiable, or less
compassionate to your poor Wilson; and yet it would be detestable
ingratitude in me to form such a wish, considering how much I am
indebted to your goodness, and the ineffable pleasure I have derived
from your indulgence and approbation--Good God! I never heard your name
mentioned without emotion! the most distant prospect of being admitted
to your company, filled my whole soul with a kind of pleasing alarm! as
the time approached, my heart beat with redoubled force, and every
nerve thrilled with a transport of expectation; but, when I found myself
actually in your presence;--when I heard you speak;--when I saw you
smile; when I beheld your charming eyes turned favourably upon me; my
breast was filled with such tumults of delight, as wholly deprived me of
the power of utterance, and wrapt me in a delirium of joy!--encouraged
by your sweetness of temper and affability, I ventured to describe the
feelings of my heart--even then you did not check my presumption--you
pitied my sufferings and gave me leave to hope you put a
favourable--perhaps too favourable a construction, on my
appearance--certain it is, I am no player in love--I speak the language
of my own heart; and have no prompter but nature. Yet there is something
in this heart, which I have not yet disclosed.--I flattered myself--But,
I will not--I must not proceed. Dear Miss Liddy! for Heaven's sake,
contrive, if possible, some means of letting me speak to you before you
leave Gloucester; otherwise, I know not what will--But I begin to rave
again.--I will endeavour to bear this trial with fortitude--while I am
capable of reflecting upon your tenderness and truth, I surely have no
cause to despair--a cloud hangs over me, and there is a dreadful weight
upon my spirits! While you stay in this place, I shall continually hover
about your lodgings, as the parted soul is said to linger about the
grave where its mortal comfort lies.--I know, if it is in your power,
you will task your humanity--your compassion--shall I add, your
affection?--in order to assuage the almost intolerable disquiet that
torments the heart of your afflicted,

WILSON GLOUCESTER, March 31.




To Sir WATKIN PHILLIPS, of Jesus college, Oxon.

HOT WELL, April 18.

DEAR PHILLIPS,

I give Mansel credit for his invention, in propagating the report that I
had a quarrel with a mountebank's merry Andrew at Gloucester: but I have
too much respect for every appendage of wit, to quarrel even with the
lowest buffoonery; and therefore I hope Mansel and I shall always be
good friends. I cannot, however, approve of his drowning my poor
dog Ponto, on purpose to convert Ovid's pleonasm into a punning
epitaph,--deerant quoque Littora Ponto: for, that he threw him into the
Isis, when it was so high and impetuous, with no other view than to kill
the fleas, is an excuse that will not hold water--But I leave poor Ponto
to his fate, and hope Providence will take care to accommodate Mansel
with a drier death.

As there is nothing that can be called company at the Well, I am here
in a state of absolute rustication: This, however, gives me leisure to
observe the singularities in my uncle's character, which seems to have
interested your curiosity. The truth is, his disposition and mine,
which, like oil and vinegar, repelled one another at first, have now
begun to mix by dint of being beat up together. I was once apt to
believe him a complete Cynic; and that nothing but the necessity of his
occasions could compel him to get within the pale of society--I am now
of another opinion. I think his peevishness arises partly from bodily
pain, and partly from a natural excess of mental sensibility; for, I
suppose, the mind as well as the body, is in some cases endued with a
morbid excess of sensation.

I was t'other day much diverted with a conversation that passed in the
Pump-room, betwixt him and the famous Dr L--n, who is come to ply at the
Well for patients. My uncle was complaining of the stink, occasioned
by the vast quantity of mud and slime which the river leaves at low ebb
under the windows of the Pumproom. He observed, that the exhalations
arising from such a nuisance, could not but be prejudicial to the weak
lungs of many consumptive patients, who came to drink the water. The
Doctor overhearing this remark, made up to him, and assured him he was
mistaken. He said, people in general were so misled by vulgar prejudices
that philosophy was hardly sufficient to undeceive them. Then humming
thrice, he assumed a most ridiculous solemnity of aspect, and entered
into a learned investigation of the nature of stink. He observed,
that stink, or stench, meant no more than a strong impression on
the olfactory nerves; and might be applied to substances of the most
opposite qualities; that in the Dutch language, stinken signifies the
most agreeable perfume, as well as the most fetid odour, as appears in
Van Vloudel's translation of Horace, in that beautiful ode, Quis multa
gracilis, &c.--The words fiquidis perfusus odoribus, he translates van
civet & moschata gestinken: that individuals differed toto coelo in
their opinion of smells, which, indeed, was altogether as arbitrary
as the opinion of beauty; that the French were pleased with the putrid
effluvia of animal food; and so were the Hottentots in Africa, and the
Savages in Greenland; and that the Negroes on the coast of Senegal would
not touch fish till it was rotten; strong presumptions in favour of what
is generally called stink, as those nations are in a state of nature,
undebauched by luxury, unseduced by whim and caprice: that he had reason
to believe the stercoraceous flavour, condemned by prejudice as a stink,
was, in fact, most agreeable to the organs of smelling; for, that every
person who pretended to nauseate the smell of another's excretions,
snuffed up his own with particular complacency; for the truth of which
he appealed to all the ladies and gentlemen then present: he said, the
inhabitants of Madrid and Edinburgh found particular satisfaction
in breathing their own atmosphere, which was always impregnated with
stercoraceous effluvia: that the learned Dr B--, in his treatise on the
Four Digestions, explains in what manner the volatile effluvia from the
intestines stimulate and promote the operations of the animal economy:
he affirmed, the last Grand Duke of Tuscany, of the Medicis family,
who refined upon sensuality with the spirit of a philosopher, was so
delighted with that odour, that he caused the essence of ordure to be
extracted, and used it as the most delicious perfume: that he himself
(the doctor) when he happened to be low-spirited, or fatigued with
business, found immediate relief and uncommon satisfaction from hanging
over the stale contents of a close-stool, while his servant stirred it
about under his nose; nor was this effect to be wondered at, when we
consider that this substance abounds with the self-same volatile salts
that are so greedily smelled to by the most delicate invalids, after
they have been extracted and sublimed by the chemists.--By this time the
company began to hold their noses; but the doctor, without taking
the least notice of this signal, proceeded to shew, that many fetid
substances were not only agreeable but salutary; such as assa foetida,
and other medicinal gums, resins, roots, and vegetables, over and above
burnt feathers, tan-pits, candle-snuffs, &c. In short, he used many
learned arguments to persuade his audience out of their senses; and from
stench made a transition to filth, which he affirmed was also a mistaken
idea, in as much as objects so called, were no other than certain
modifications of matter, consisting of the same principles that enter
into the composition of all created essences, whatever they may be: that
in the filthiest production of nature, a philosopher considered nothing
but the earth, water, salt and air, of which it was compounded; that,
for his own part, he had no more objections to drinking the dirtiest
ditch-water, than he had to a glass of water from the Hot Well, provided
he was assured there was nothing poisonous in the concrete. Then
addressing himself to my uncle, 'Sir (said he) you seem to be of a
dropsical habit, and probably will soon have a confirmed ascites: if
I should be present when you are tapped, I will give you a convincing
proof of what I assert, by drinking without hesitation the water
that comes out of your abdomen.'--The ladies made wry faces at this
declaration, and my uncle, changing colour, told him he did not desire
any such proof of his philosophy: 'But I should be glad to know (said
he) what makes you think I am of a dropsical habit?' 'Sir, I beg pardon
(replied the Doctor) I perceive your ancles are swelled, and you seem to
have the facies leucophlegmatica. Perhaps, indeed, your disorder may
be oedematous, or gouty, or it may be the lues venerea: If you have any
reason to flatter yourself it is this last, sir, I will undertake
to cure you with three small pills, even if the disease should have
attained its utmost inveteracy. Sir, it is an arcanum, which I have
discovered, and prepared with infinite labour.--Sir, I have lately cured
a woman in Bristol--a common prostitute, sir, who had got all the worst
symptoms of the disorder; such as nodi, tophi, and gummata, verruca,
cristoe Galli, and a serpiginous eruption, or rather a pocky itch
all over her body. By the time she had taken the second pill, sir, by
Heaven! she was as smooth as my hand, and the third made her sound and
as fresh as a new born infant.' 'Sir (cried my uncle peevishly) I have
no reason to flatter myself that my disorder comes within the efficacy
of your nostrum. But this patient you talk of may not be so sound at
bottom as you imagine.' 'I can't possibly be mistaken (rejoined the
philosopher) for I have had communication with her three times--I always
ascertain my cures in that manner.' At this remark, all the ladies
retired to another corner of the room, and some of them began to
spit.--As to my uncle, though he was ruffled at first by the doctor's
saying he was dropsical, he could not help smiling at this ridiculous
confession and, I suppose, with a view to punish this original, told
him there was a wart upon his nose, that looked a little suspicious. 'I
don't pretend to be a judge of those matters (said he) but I understand
that warts are often produced by the distemper; and that one upon your
nose seems to have taken possession of the very keystone of the
bridge, which I hope is in no danger of falling.' L--n seemed a little
confounded at this remark, and assured him it was nothing but a common
excrescence of the cuticula, but that the bones were all sound below;
for the truth of this assertion he appealed to the touch, desiring he
would feel the part. My uncle said it was a matter of such delicacy to
meddle with a gentleman's nose, that he declined the office--upon which,
the Doctor turning to me, intreated me to do him that favour. I complied
with his request, and handled it so roughly, that he sneezed, and the
tears ran down his cheeks, to the no small entertainment of the company,
and particularly of my uncle, who burst out a-laughing for the first
time since I have been with him; and took notice, that the part seemed
to be very tender. 'Sir (cried the Doctor) it is naturally a tender
part; but to remove all possibility of doubt, I will take off the wart
this very night.'

So saying, he bowed, with great solemnity all round, and retired to his
own lodgings, where he applied a caustic to the wart; but it spread in
such a manner as to produce a considerable inflammation, attended with
an enormous swelling; so that when he next appeared, his whole face was
overshadowed by this tremendous nozzle; and the rueful eagerness with
which he explained this unlucky accident, was ludicrous beyond all
description.--I was much pleased with meeting the original of a
character, which you and I have often laughed at in description; and
what surprises me very much, I find the features in the picture, which
has been drawn for him, rather softened than over-charged.

As I have something else to say; and this letter has run to an
unconscionable length, I shall now give you a little respite, and
trouble you again by the very first post. I wish you would take it in
your head to retaliate these double strokes upon

Yours always, J. MELFORD




To Sir WATKIN PHILLIPS, of Jesus college, Oxon.

HOT WELL, April 20.

DEAR KNIGHT,

I now sit down to execute the threat in the tail of my last. The truth
is, I am big with the secret, and long to be delivered. It relates to my
guardian, who, you know, is at present our principal object in view.

T'other day, I thought I had detected him in such a state of frailty, as
would but ill become his years and character. There is a decent sort of
woman, not disagreeable in her person, that comes to the Well, with a
poor emaciated child, far gone in a consumption. I had caught my uncle's
eyes several times directed to this person, with a very suspicious
expression in them, and every time he saw himself observed, he hastily
withdrew them, with evident marks of confusion--I resolved to watch him
more narrowly, and saw him speaking to her privately in a corner of the
walk. At length, going down to the Well one day, I met her half way up
the hill to Clifton, and could not help suspecting she was going to our
lodgings by appointment, as it was about one o'clock, the hour when my
sister and I are generally at the Pump-room.--This notion exciting my
curiosity, I returned by a back-way, and got unperceived into my own
chamber, which is contiguous to my uncle's apartment. Sure enough, the
woman was introduced but not into his bedchamber; he gave her audience
in a parlour; so that I was obliged to shift my station to another room,
where, however, there was a small chink in the partition, through which
I could perceive what passed. My uncle, though a little lame, rose up
when she came in, and setting a chair for her, desired she would sit
down: then he asked if she would take a dish of chocolate, which she
declined, with much acknowledgment. After a short pause, he said, in a
croaking tone of voice, which confounded me not a little, 'Madam, I am
truly concerned for your misfortunes; and if this trifle can be of any
service to you, I beg you will accept it without ceremony.' So saying,
he put a bit of paper into her hand, which she opening with great
trepidation, exclaimed in an extacy, 'Twenty pounds! Oh, sir!' and
sinking down upon a settee, fainted away--Frightened at this fit, and,
I suppose, afraid of calling for assistance, lest her situation
should give rise to unfavourable conjectures, he ran about the room in
distraction, making frightful grimaces; and, at length, had recollection
enough to throw a little water in her face; by which application she was
brought to herself: but, then her feeling took another turn. She shed
a flood of tears, and cried aloud, 'I know not who you are: but,
sure--worthy sir--generous sir!--the distress of me and my poor dying
child--Oh! if the widow's prayers--if the orphan's tears of gratitude
can ought avail--gracious Providence--Blessings!--shower down eternal
blessings.'--Here she was interrupted by my uncle, who muttered in
a voice still more and more discordant, 'For Heaven's sake be quiet,
madam--consider--the people of the house--'sdeath! can't you.'--All this
time she was struggling to throw herself on her knees, while he seizing
her by the wrists, endeavoured to seat her upon the settee, saying,
'Prithee--good now--hold your tongue'--At that instant, who should
burst into--the room but our aunt Tabby! of all antiquated maidens the
most diabolically capricious--Ever prying into other people's affairs,
she had seen the woman enter, and followed her to the door, where she
stood listening, but probably could hear nothing distinctly, except my
uncle's, last exclamation; at which she bounded into the parlour in a
violent rage, that dyed the tip of her nose of a purple hue,--'Fy upon
you, Matt! (cried she) what doings are these, to disgrace your own
character, and disparage your family?'--Then, snatching the bank note
out of the stranger's hand, she went on--'How now, twenty
pounds!--here is temptation with a witness!--Good-woman, go about
your business--Brother, brother, I know not which most to admire; your
concupissins, or your extravagance!'--'Good God (exclaimed the poor
woman) shall a worthy gentleman's character suffer for an action
that does honour to humanity?' By this time, uncle's indignation was
effectually roused. His face grew pale, his teeth chattered, and his
eyes flashed--'Sister (cried he, in a voice like thunder) I vow to God,
your impertinence is exceedingly provoking.' With these words, he took
her by the hand, and, opening the door of communication, thrust her into
the chamber where I stood, so affected by the scene, that the tears ran
down my cheeks. Observing these marks of emotion, 'I don't wonder (said
she) to see you concerned at the back-slidings of so near a relation; a
man of his years and infirmities: These are fine doings, truly--This
is a rare example, set by a guardian, for the benefit of his
pupils--Monstrous! incongruous! sophistical!'--I thought it was but
an act of justice to set her to rights; and therefore explained the
mystery. But she would not be undeceived, 'What (said she) would you
go for to offer for to arguefy me out of my senses? Did'n't I hear
him whispering to her to hold her tongue? Did'n't I see her in tears?
Did'n't I see him struggling to throw her upon the couch? 0 filthy!
hideous! abominable! Child, child, talk not to me of charity.--Who gives
twenty pounds in charity?--But you are a stripling--You know nothing of
the world. Besides, charity begins at home--Twenty pounds would buy me a
complete suit of flowered silk, trimmings and all--' In short, I quitted
the room, my contempt for her, and my respect for her brother, being
increased in the same proportion. I have since been informed, that the
person, whom my uncle so generously relieved, is the widow of an ensign,
who has nothing to depend upon but the pension of fifteen pounds a year.
The people of the Well-house give her an excellent character. She lodges
in a garret, and works very hard at plain work, to support her daughter,
who is dying of a consumption. I must own, to my shame, I feel a strong
inclination to follow my uncle's example, in relieving this poor widow;
but, betwixt friends, I am afraid of being detected in a weakness, that
might entail the ridicule of the company, upon,

Dear Phillips, Yours always, J. MELFORD

Direct your next to me at Bath; and remember me to all our
fellow-jesuits.




To Dr LEWIS.

HOT WELL, April 20.

I understand your hint. There are mysteries in physic, as well as in
religion; which we of the profane have no right to investigate--A
man must not presume to use his reason, unless he has studied the
categories, and can chop logic by mode and figure--Between friends, I
think every man of tolerable parts ought, at my time of day, to be both
physician and lawyer, as far as his own constitution and property are
concerned. For my own part, I have had an hospital these fourteen years
within myself, and studied my own case with the most painful attention;
consequently may be supposed to know something of the matter, although
I have not taken regular courses of physiology et cetera et cetera.--
In short, I have for some time been of opinion (no offence, dear Doctor)
that the sum of all your medical discoveries amounts to this, that the
more you study the less you know.--I have read all that has been written
on the Hot Wells, and what I can collect from the whole, is, that the
water contains nothing but a little salt, and calcarious earth, mixed in
such inconsiderable proportion, as can have very little, if any, effect
on the animal economy. This being the case, I think the man deserves to
be fitted with a cap and bells, who for such a paultry advantage as this
spring affords, sacrifices his precious time, which might be employed
in taking more effectual remedies, and exposes himself to the dirt, the
stench, the chilling blasts, and perpetual rains, that render this place
to me intolerable. If these waters, from a small degree of astringency,
are of some service in the diabetes, diarrhoea, and night sweats, when
the secretions are too much increased, must not they do harm in the same
proportion, where the humours are obstructed, as in the asthma,
scurvy, gout and dropsy?--Now we talk of the dropsy, here is a strange
fantastical oddity, one of your brethren, who harangues every day in
the Pump-room, as if he was hired to give lectures on all subjects
whatsoever--I know not what to make of him--Sometimes he makes
shrewd remarks; at other times he talks like the greatest simpleton in
nature--He has read a great deal; but without method or judgment, and
digested nothing. He believes every thing he has read; especially if
it has any thing of the marvellous in it and his conversation is a
surprizing hotch-potch of erudition and extravagance. He told me t'other
day, with great confidence, that my case was dropsical; or, as he called
it, leucophlegmatic: A sure sign, that his want of experience is equal
to his presumption--for, you know, there is nothing analogous to the
dropsy in my disorder--I wish those impertinent fellows, with their
ricketty understandings, would keep their advice for those that ask it.
Dropsy, indeed! Sure I have not lived to the age of fifty-five, and had
such experience of my own disorder, and consulted you and other eminent
physicians, so often, and so long, to be undeceived by such a--But,
without all doubt, the man is mad; and, therefore, what he says is of
no consequence. I had, yesterday, a visit from Higgins, who came hither
under the terror of your threats, and brought me in a present a brace of
hares, which he owned he took in my ground; and I could not persuade
the fellow that he did wrong, or that I would ever prosecute him for
poaching--I must desire you will wink hard at the practices of this
rascallion, otherwise I shall be plagued with his presents, which cost
me more than they are worth.--If I could wonder at any thing Fitzowen
does, I should be surprized at his assurance in desiring you to solicit
my vote for him at the next election for the county: for him, who
opposed me, on the like occasion, with the most illiberal competition.
You may tell him civilly, that I beg to be excused. Direct your next for
me at Bath, whither I propose to remove to-morrow; not only on my own
account, but for the sake of my niece, Liddy, who is like to relapse.
The poor creature fell into a fit yesterday, while I was cheapening a
pair of spectacles, with a Jew-pedlar. I am afraid there is something
still lurking in that little heart of hers, which I hope a change of
objects will remove. Let me know what you think of this half-witted
Doctor's impertinent, ridiculous, and absurd notion of my disorder--So
far from being dropsical, I am as lank in the belly as a grey-hound;
and, by measuring my ancle with a pack-thread, I find the swelling
subsides every day. From such doctors, good Lord deliver us!--I have not
yet taken any lodgings in Bath; because there we can be accommodated at
a minute's warning, and I shall choose for myself--I need not say your
directions for drinking and bathing will be agreeable to,

Dear Lewis, Yours ever, MAT. BRAMBLE

P.S. I forgot to tell you, that my right ancle pits, a symptom, as I
take it, of its being oedematous, not leucophlegmatic.




To Miss LETTY WILLIS, at Gloucester

HOT WELL, April 21.

MY DEAR LETTY,

I did not intend to trouble you again, till we should be settled at
Bath; but having the occasion of Jarvis, I could not let it slip,
especially as I have something extraordinary to communicate. O, my dear
companion! What shall I tell you? for several days past there was a
Jew-looking man, that plied at the Wells with a box of spectacles; and
he always eyed me so earnestly, that I began to be very uneasy. At last,
he came to our lodgings at Clifton, and lingered about the door, as
if he wanted to speak to somebody--I was seized with an odd kind of
fluttering, and begged Win to throw herself in his way: but the poor
girl has weak nerves, and was afraid of his beard. My uncle, having
occasion for new glasses, called him up stairs, and was trying a pair
of spectacles, when the man, advancing to me, said in a whisper--O
gracious! what d'ye think he said?--'I am Wilson!' His features struck
me that very moment it was Wilson, sure enough! but so disguised, that
it would have been impossible to know him, if my heart had not assisted
in the discovery. I was so surprised, and so frightened that I fainted
away, but soon recovered; and found myself supported by him on the
chair, while my uncle was running about the room, with the spectacles
on his nose, calling for help. I had no opportunity to speak to him; but
looks were sufficiently expressive. He was payed for his glasses, and
went away. Then I told Win who he was, and sent her after him to the
Pump-room; where she spoke to him, and begged him in my name to withdraw
from the place, that he might not incur the suspicion of my uncle or my
brother, if he did not want to see me die of terror and vexation. The
poor youth declared, with tears in his eyes, that he had something
extraordinary to communicate; and asked, if she would deliver a letter
to me: but this she absolutely refused, by my order.--Finding her
obstinate in her refusal, he desired she would tell me that he was no
longer a player, but a gentleman; in which character he would very soon
avow his passion for me, without fear of censure or reproach--Nay,
he even discovered his name and family, which, to my great grief,
the simple girl forgot, in the confusion occasioned by her being seen
talking to him by my brother, who stopt her on the road, and asked
what business she had with that rascally Jew. She pretended she was
cheapening a stay-hook, but was thrown into such a quandary, that she
forgot the most material part of the information; and when she came
home, went into an hysteric fit of laughing. This transaction happened
three days ago, during which he has not appeared, so that I suppose he
has gone. Dear Letty! you see how Fortune takes pleasure in persecuting
your poor friend. If you should see him at Gloucester--or if you have
seen him, and know his real name and family, pray keep me no longer in
suspence--And yet, if he is under no obligation to keep himself longer
concealed, and has a real affection for me, I should hope he will, in a
little time, declare himself to my relations. Sure, if there is
nothing unsuitable in the match, they won't be so cruel as to thwart my
inclinations--O what happiness would then be my portion! I can't help
indulging the thought, and pleasing my fancy with such agreeable ideas;
which after all, perhaps, will never be realized--But, why should I
despair? who knows what will happen?--We set out for Bath to-morrow, and
I am almost sorry for it; as I begin to be in love with solitude, and
this is a charming romantic place. The air is so pure; the Downs are so
agreeable; the furz in full blossom; the ground enamelled with daisies,
and primroses, and cowslips; all the trees bursting into leaves, and the
hedges already clothed with their vernal livery; the mountains covered
with flocks of sheep and tender bleating wanton lambkins playing,
frisking, and skipping from side to side; the groves resound with
the notes of blackbird, thrush, and linnet; and all night long sweet
Philomel pours forth her ravishingly delightful song. Then, for
variety, we go down to the nymph of Bristol spring, where the company is
assembled before dinner; so good natured, so free, so easy; and there we
drink the water so clear, so pure, so mild, so charmingly maukish. There
the fun is so chearful and reviving; the weather so soft; the walk so
agreeable; the prospect so amusing; and the ships and boats going up and
down the river, close under the windows of the Pump-room, afford such an
enchanting variety of Moving Pictures, as require a much abler pen than
mine to describe. To make this place a perfect paradise to me, nothing
is wanting but an agreeable companion and sincere friend; such as
my dear miss Willis hath been, and I hope still will be, to her ever
faithful.

LYDIA MELFORD

Direct for me, still under cover, to Win; and Jarvis will take care to
convey it safe. Adieu.




To Sir WATKIN PHILLIPS, of Jesus college, Oxon.

BATH, April 24.

DEAR PHILLIPS,

You have, indeed, reason to be surprised, that I should have concealed
my correspondence with miss Blackerby from you, to whom I disclosed all
my other connexions of that nature; but the truth is, I never dreamed
of any such commerce, till your last informed me, that it had produced
something which could not be much longer concealed. It is a lucky
circumstance, however, that her reputation will not suffer any
detriment, but rather derive advantage from the discovery; which
will prove, at least, that it is not quite so rotten as most people
imagined--For my own part, I declare to you, in all the sincerity of
friendship, that, far from having any amorous intercourse with the
object in question, I never had the least acquaintance with her person;
but, if she is really in the condition you describe, I suspect Mansel to
be at the bottom of the whole. His visits to that shrine were no secret;
and this attachment, added to some good offices, which you know he has
done me, since I left Alma-mater, give me a right to believe him capable
of saddling me with this scandal, when my back was turned--Nevertheless,
if my name can be of any service to him, he is welcome to make use of
it; and if the woman should be abandoned enough to swear his banding to
me, I must beg the favour of you to compound with the parish: I shall
pay the penalty without repining; and you will be so good as to draw
upon me immediately for the sum required--On this occasion, I act by the
advice of my uncle; who says I shall have good-luck if I pass through
life without being obliged to make many more compositions of the same
kind. The old gentleman told me last night, with great good-humour, that
betwixt the age of twenty and forty, he had been obliged to provide for
nine bastards, sworn to him by women whom he never saw--Mr Bramble's
character, which seems to interest you greatly, opens and improves upon
me every day. His singularities afford a rich mine of entertainment;
his understanding, so far as I can judge, is well cultivated; his
observations on life are equally just, pertinent, and uncommon. He
affects misanthropy, in order to conceal the sensibility of a heart,
which is tender, even to a degree of weakness. This delicacy of feeling,
or soreness of the mind, makes him timorous and fearful; but then he
is afraid of nothing so much as of dishonour; and although he is
exceedingly cautious of giving offence, he will fire at the least hint
of insolence or ill-breeding.--Respectable as he is, upon the whole,
I can't help being sometimes diverted by his little distresses; which
provoke him to let fly the shafts of his satire, keen and penetrating
as the arrows of Teucer--Our aunt, Tabitha, acts upon him as a perpetual
grind-stone--She is, in all respects, a striking contrast to her
brother--But I reserve her portrait for another occasion.

Three days ago we came hither from the Hot Well, and took possession
of the first floor of a lodging-house, on the South Parade; a situation
which my uncle chose, for its being near the Bath, and remote from the
noise of carriages. He was scarce warm in the lodgings when he called
for his night-cap, his wide shoes, and flannel; and declared himself
invested with the gout in his right foot; though, I believe it had as
yet reached no farther than his imagination. It was not long before he
had reason to repent his premature declaration; for our aunt Tabitha
found means to make such a clamour and confusion, before the flannels
could be produced from the trunk, that one would have imagined the house
was on fire. All this time, uncle sat boiling with impatience, biting
his fingers, throwing up his eyes, and muttering ejaculations; at length
he burst into a kind of convulsive laugh, after which he hummed a song;
and when the hurricane was over, exclaimed 'Blessed be God for all
things!' This, however, was but the beginning of his troubles. Mrs
Tabitha's favourite dog Chowder, having paid his compliments to a female
turnspit of his own species, in the kitchen, involved himself in a
quarrel with no fewer than five rivals, who set upon him at once, and
drove him up stairs to the dining room door, with hideous noise: there
our aunt and her woman, taking arms in his defence, joined the
concert; which became truly diabolical. This fray being with difficulty
suppressed, by the intervention of our own footman and the cook-maid
of the house, the squire had just opened his mouth, to expostulate with
Tabby, when the town-waits, in the passage below, struck up their music
(if music it may be called) with such a sudden burst of sound, as made
him start and stare, with marks of indignation and disquiet. He had
recollection enough to send his servant with some money to silence those
noisy intruders; and they were immediately dismissed, though not without
some opposition on the part of Tabitha, who thought it but reasonable
that he should have more music for his money. Scarce had he settled this
knotty point, when a strange kind of thumping and bouncing was heard
right over-head, in the second story, so loud and violent, as to shake
the whole building. I own I was exceedingly provoked at this new alarm;
and before my uncle had time to express himself on the subject, I ran
up stairs, to see what was the matter. Finding the room-door open, I
entered without ceremony, and perceived an object, which I can not now
recollect without laughing to excess--It was a dancing master, with his
scholar, in the act of teaching. The master was blind of one eye, and
lame of one foot, and led about the room his pupil; who seemed to be
about the age of threescore, stooped mortally, was tall, raw-boned,
hard-favoured, with a woollen night-cap on his head; and he had stript
off his coat, that he might be more nimble in his motions--Finding
himself intruded upon, by a person he did not know, he forthwith girded
himself with a long iron sword, and advancing to me, with a peremptory
air, pronounced, in a true Hibernian accent, 'Mister What d'ye callum,
by my saoul and conscience, I am very glad to sea you, if you are after
coming in the way of friendship; and indeed, and indeed now, I believe
you are my friend sure enough, gra; though I never had the honour to sea
your face before, my dear; for becaase you come like a friend, without
any ceremony at all, at all'--I told him the nature of my visit would
not admit of ceremony; that I was come to desire he would make less
noise, as there was a sick gentleman below, whom he had no right
to disturb with such preposterous doings. 'Why, look-ye now, young
gentleman (replied this original) perhaps, upon another occasion, I
might shivilly request you to explain the maining of that hard word,
prepasterous: but there's a time for all things, honey'--So saying,
he passed me with great agility, and, running down stairs, found our
foot-man at the dining-room door, of whom he demanded admittance, to
pay his respects to the stranger. As the fellow did not think proper
to refuse the request of such a formidable figure, he was immediately
introduced, and addressed himself to my uncle in these words: 'Your
humble servant, good sir,--I'm not so prepasterous, as your son calls
it, but I know the rules of shivility--I'm a poor knight of Ireland,
my name is sir Ulic Mackilligut, of the county of Galway; being your
fellow-lodger, I'm come to pay my respects, and to welcome you to the
South Parade, and to offer my best services to you, and your good lady,
and your pretty daughter; and even to the young gentleman your son,
though he thinks me a prepasterous fellow--You must know I am to have
the honour to open a ball next door to-morrow with lady Mac Manus; and
being rusted in my dancing, I was refreshing my memory with a little
exercise; but if I had known there was a sick person below, by Christ!
I would have sooner danced a hornpipe upon my own head, than walk the
softest minuet over yours.'--My uncle, who was not a little startled at
his first appearance, received his compliment with great complacency,
insisted upon his being seated, thanked him for the honour of his visit,
and reprimanded me for my abrupt expostulation with a gentleman of his
rank and character. Thus tutored, I asked pardon of the knight, who,
forthwith starting up, embraced me so close, that I could hardly
breathe; and assured me, he loved me as his own soul. At length,
recollecting his night-cap, he pulled it off in some confusion; and,
with his bald-pate uncovered, made a thousand apologies to the ladies,
as he retired--At that instant, the Abbey bells, began to ring so
loud, that we could not hear one another speak; and this peal, as
we afterwards learned, was for the honour of Mr Bullock, an eminent
cowkeeper of Tottenham, who had just arrived at Bath, to drink the
waters for indigestion. Mr Bramble had not time to make his remarks upon
the agreeable nature of this serenade, before his ears were saluted with
another concert that interested him more nearly. Two negroes, belonging
to a Creole gentleman, who lodged in the same house, taking their
station at a window in the stair-case, about ten feet from our
dining-room door, began to practise upon the French-horn; and being in
the very first rudiments of execution, produced such discordant sounds,
as might have discomposed the organs of an ass. You may guess what
effect they had upon the irritable nerves of uncle; who, with the most
admirable expression of splenetic surprize in his countenance, sent
his man to silence these dreadful blasts, and desire the musicians to
practise in some other place, as they had no right to stand there and
disturb all the lodgers in the house. Those sable performers, far from
taking the hint, and withdrawing, treated the messenger with great
insolence; bidding him carry his compliments to their master, colonel
Rigworm, who would give him a proper answer, and a good drubbing into
the bargain; in the mean time they continued their noise, and even
endeavoured to make it more disagreeable; laughing between whiles, at
the thoughts of being able to torment their betters with impunity. Our
'squire, incensed at the additional insult, immediately dispatched the
servant, with his compliments to colonel Rigworm, requesting that
he would order his blacks to be quiet, as the noise they made was
altogether intolerable--To this message, the Creole colonel replied,
that his horns had a right to sound on a common staircase; that there
they should play for his diversion; and that those who did not like the
noise, might look for lodgings elsewhere. Mr Bramble no sooner received
this reply, than his eyes began to glisten, his face grew pale, and his
teeth chattered. After a moment's pause, he slipt on his shoes, without
speaking a word, or seeming to feel any further disturbance from the
gout in his toes. Then snatching his cane, he opened the door and
proceeded to the place where the black trumpeters were posted. There,
without further hesitation, he began to belabour them both; and exerted
himself with such astonishing vigour and agility, that both their heads
and horns were broken in a twinkling, and they ran howling down stairs
to their master's parlour-door. The squire, following them half way,
called aloud, that the colonel might hear him, 'Go, rascals, and tell
your master what I have done; if he thinks himself injured, he knows
where to come for satisfaction. As for you, this is but an earnest of
what you shall receive, if ever you presume to blow a horn again here,
while I stay in the house.' So saying, he retired to his apartment, in
expectation of hearing from the West Indian; but the colonel prudently
declined any farther prosecution of the dispute. My sister Liddy was
frighted into a fit, from which she was no sooner recovered, than Mrs
Tabitha began a lecture upon patience; which her brother interrupted
with a most significant grin, 'True, sister, God increase my patience
and your discretion. I wonder (added he) what sort of sonata we are to
expect from this overture, in which the devil, that presides over horrid
sounds, hath given us such variations of discord--The trampling of
porters, the creaking and crashing of trunks, the snarling of curs, the
scolding of women, the squeaking and squalling of fiddles and hautboys
out of tune, the bouncing of the Irish baronet over-head, and the
bursting, belching, and brattling of the French-horns in the passage
(not to mention the harmonious peal that still thunders from the Abbey
steeple) succeeding one another without interruption, like the different
parts of the same concert, have given me such an idea of what a poor
invalid has to expect in this temple, dedicated to Silence and Repose,
that I shall certainly shift my quarters to-morrow, and endeavour to
effectuate my retreat before Sir Ulic opens the ball with my lady Mac
Manus; a conjunction that bodes me no good.' This intimation was by no
means agreeable to Mrs Tabitha, whose ears were not quite so delicate as
those of her brother--She said it would be great folly to move from
such agreeable lodgings, the moment they were comfortably settled. She
wondered he should be such an enemy to music and mirth. She heard no
noise but of his own making: it was impossible to manage a family in
dumb-shew. He might harp as long as he pleased upon her scolding; but
she never scolded, except for his advantage; but he would never be
satisfied, even tho'f she should sweat blood and water in his service--I
have a great notion that our aunt, who is now declining into the most
desperate state of celibacy, had formed some design upon the heart of
Sir Ulic Mackilligut, which she feared might be frustrated by our abrupt
departure from these lodgings. Her brother, eyeing her askance, 'Pardon
me, sister (said he) I should be a savage, indeed, were I insensible of
my own felicity, in having such a mild, complaisant, good-humoured, and
considerate companion and housekeeper; but as I have got a weak head,
and my sense of hearing is painfully acute, before I have recourse to
plugs of wool and cotton, I'll try whether I can't find another lodging,
where I shall have more quiet and less music.' He accordingly dispatched
his man upon this service; and next day he found a small house in
Milsham-street, which he hires by the week. Here, at least, we enjoy
convenience and quiet within doors, as much as Tabby's temper will
allow; but the squire still complains of flying pains in the stomach
and head, for which he bathes and drinks the waters. He is not so bad,
however, but that he goes in person to the pump, the rooms, and the
coffeehouses; where he picks up continual food for ridicule and satire.
If I can glean any thing for your amusement, either from his observation
or my own, you shall have it freely, though I am afraid it will poorly
compensate the trouble of reading these tedious insipid letters of,

Dear Phillips, Yours always, J. MELFORD




To Dr LEWIS. BATH, April 23. DEAR DOCTOR,

If I did not know that the exercise of your profession has habituated
you to the hearing of complaints, I should make a conscience of
troubling you with my correspondence, which may be truly called the
lamentations of Matthew Bramble. Yet I cannot help thinking I have
some right to discharge the overflowings of my spleen upon you, whose
province it is to remove those disorders that occasioned it; and let
me tell you, it is no small alleviation of my grievances, that I have a
sensible friend, to whom I can communicate my crusty humours, which, by
retention, would grow intolerably acrimonious.

You must know, I find nothing but disappointment at Bath; which is
so altered, that I can scarce believe it is the same place that I
frequented about thirty years ago. Methinks I hear you say, 'Altered it
is, without all doubt: but then it is altered for the better; a truth
which, perhaps, you would own without hesitation, if you yourself was
not altered for the worse.' The reflection may, for aught I know, be
just. The inconveniences which I overlooked in the high-day of health,
will naturally strike with exaggerated impression on the irritable
nerves of an invalid, surprised by premature old age, and shattered with
long-suffering--But, I believe, you will not deny, that this place,
which Nature and Providence seem to have intended as a resource
from distemper and disquiet, is become the very centre of racket and
dissipation. Instead of that peace, tranquillity, and case, so necessary
to those who labour under bad health, weak nerves, and irregular
spirits; here we have nothing but noise, tumult, and hurry; with the
fatigue and slavery of maintaining a ceremonial, more stiff, formal, and
oppressive, than the etiquette of a German elector. A national hospital
it may be, but one would imagine that none but lunatics are admitted;
and truly, I will give you leave to call me so, if I stay much longer at
Bath.--But I shall take another opportunity to explain my sentiments
at greater length on this subject--I was impatient to see the boasted
improvements in architecture, for which the upper parts of the town have
been so much celebrated and t'other day I made a circuit of all the new
buildings. The Square, though irregular, is, on the whole, pretty well
laid out, spacious, open, and airy; and, in my opinion, by far the most
wholesome and agreeable situation in Bath, especially the upper side of
it; but the avenues to it are mean, dirty, dangerous, and indirect. Its
communication with the Baths, is through the yard of an inn, where the
poor trembling valetudinarian is carried in a chair, betwixt the heels
of a double row of horses, wincing under the curry-combs of grooms and
postilions, over and above the hazard of being obstructed, or overturned
by the carriages which are continually making their exit or their
entrance--I suppose after some chairmen shall have been maimed, and
a few lives lost by those accidents, the corporation will think, in
earnest, about providing a more safe and commodious passage. The Circus
is a pretty bauble, contrived for shew, and looks like Vespasian's
amphitheatre turned outside in. If we consider it in point of
magnificence, the great number of small doors belonging to the separate
houses, the inconsiderable height of the different orders, the affected
ornaments of the architrave, which are both childish and misplaced,
and the areas projecting into the street, surrounded with iron rails,
destroy a good part of its effect upon the eye; and, perhaps, we shall
find it still more defective, if we view it in the light of convenience.
The figure of each separate dwelling-house, being the segment of a
circle, must spoil the symmetry of the rooms, by contracting them
towards the street windows, and leaving a larger sweep in the space
behind. If, instead of the areas and iron rails, which seem to be of
very little use, there had been a corridore with arcades all round,
as in Covent-garden, the appearance of the whole would have been more
magnificent and striking; those arcades would have afforded an agreeable
covered walk, and sheltered the poor chairmen and their carriages from
the rain, which is here almost perpetual. At present, the chairs stand
soaking in the open street, from morning to night, till they become so
many boxes of wet leather, for the benefit of the gouty and rheumatic,
who are transported in them from place to place. Indeed this is a
shocking inconvenience that extends over the whole city; and, I am
persuaded, it produces infinite mischief to the delicate and infirm;
even the close chairs, contrived for the sick, by standing in the open
air, have their frize linings impregnated like so many spunges, with the
moisture of the atmosphere, and those cases of cold vapour must give
a charming check to the perspiration of a patient, piping hot from the
Bath, with all his pores wide open.

But, to return to the Circus; it is inconvenient from its situation, at
so great a distance from all the markets, baths, and places of public
entertainment. The only entrance to it, through Gay-street, is so
difficult, steep, and slippery, that in wet weather, it must be
exceedingly dangerous, both for those that ride in carriages, and those
that walk a-foot; and when the street is covered with snow, as it was
for fifteen days successively this very winter, I don't see how any
individual could go either up or down, without the most imminent hazard
of broken bones. In blowing weather, I am told, most of the houses in
this hill are smothered with smoke, forced down the chimneys, by the
gusts of wind reverberated from the hill behind, which (I apprehend
likewise) must render the atmosphere here more humid and unwholesome
than it is in the square below; for the clouds, formed by the constant
evaporation from the baths and rivers in the bottom, will, in their
ascent this way, be first attracted and detained by the hill that rises
close behind the Circus, and load the air with a perpetual succession of
vapours: this point, however, may be easily ascertained by means of an
hygrometer, or a paper of salt of tartar exposed to the action of
the atmosphere. The same artist who planned the Circus, has likewise
projected a Crescent; when that is finished, we shall probably have a
Star; and those who are living thirty years hence, may, perhaps, see
all the signs of the Zodiac exhibited in architecture at Bath. These,
however fantastical, are still designs that denote some ingenuity and
knowledge in the architect; but the rage of building has laid hold on
such a number of adventurers, that one sees new houses starting up in
every out-let and every corner of Bath; contrived without judgment,
executed without solidity, and stuck together with so little regard
to plan and propriety, that the different lines of the new rows and
buildings interfere with, and intersect one another in every different
angle of conjunction. They look like the wreck of streets and squares
disjointed by an earthquake, which hath broken the ground into a variety
of holes and hillocks; or as if some Gothic devil had stuffed them
altogether in a bag, and left them to stand higgledy piggledy, just as
chance directed. What sort of a monster Bath will become in a few years,
with those growing excrescences, may be easily conceived: but the want
of beauty and proportion is not the worst effect of these new mansions;
they are built so slight, with the soft crumbling stone found in this
neighbourhood, that I shall never sleep quietly in one of them, when
it blowed (as the sailors say) a cap-full of wind; and, I am persuaded,
that my hind, Roger Williams, or any man of equal strength, would be
able to push his foot through the strongest part of their walls, without
any great exertion of his muscles. All these absurdities arise from the
general tide of luxury, which hath overspread the nation, and swept
away all, even the very dregs of the people. Every upstart of fortune,
harnessed in the trappings of the mode, presents himself at Bath, as in
the very focus of observation--Clerks and factors from the East Indies,
loaded with the spoil of plundered provinces; planters, negro-drivers,
and hucksters from our American plantations, enriched they know not
how; agents, commissaries, and contractors, who have fattened, in two
successive wars, on the blood of the nation; usurers, brokers, and
jobbers of every kind; men of low birth, and no breeding, have found
themselves suddenly translated into a state of affluence, unknown to
former ages; and no wonder that their brains should be intoxicated with
pride, vanity, and presumption. Knowing no other criterion of greatness,
but the ostentation of wealth, they discharge their affluence without
taste or conduct, through every channel of the most absurd extravagance;
and all of them hurry to Bath, because here, without any further
qualification, they can mingle with the princes and nobles of the land.
Even the wives and daughters of low tradesmen, who, like shovel-nosed
sharks, prey upon the blubber of those uncouth whales of fortune, are
infected with the same rage of displaying their importance; and the
slightest indisposition serves them for a pretext to insist upon being
conveyed to Bath, where they may hobble country-dances and cotillons
among lordlings, squires, counsellors, and clergy. These delicate
creatures from Bedfordbury, Butcher-row, Crutched-friers, and
Botolph-lane, cannot breathe in the gross air of the Lower Town, or
conform to the vulgar rules of a common lodging-house; the husband,
therefore, must provide an entire house, or elegant apartments in the
new buildings. Such is the composition of what is called the fashionable
company at Bath; where a very inconsiderable proportion of genteel
people are lost in a mob of impudent plebeians, who have neither
understanding nor judgment, nor the least idea of propriety and decorum;
and seem to enjoy nothing so much as an opportunity of insulting their
betters.

Thus the number of people, and the number of houses continue to
increase; and this will ever be the case, till the streams that swell
this irresistible torrent of folly and extravagance, shall either be
exhausted, or turned into other channels, by incidents and events which
I do not pretend to foresee. This, I own, is a subject on which I cannot
write with any degree of patience; for the mob is a monster I never
could abide, either in its head, tail, midriff, or members; I detest the
whole of it, as a mass of ignorance, presumption, malice and brutality;
and, in this term of reprobation, I include, without respect of rank,
station, or quality, all those of both sexes, who affect its manners,
and court its society.

But I have written till my fingers are crampt, and my nausea begins to
return--By your advice, I sent to London a few days ago for half a pound
of Gengzeng; though I doubt much, whether that which comes from America
is equally efficacious with what is brought from the East Indies. Some
years ago a friend of mine paid sixteen guineas for two ounces of
it; and, in six months after, it was sold in the same shop for five
shillings the pound. In short, we live in a vile world of fraud and
sophistication; so that I know nothing of equal value with the genuine
friendship of a sensible man; a rare jewel! which I cannot help thinking
myself in possession of, while I repeat the old declaration, that I am,
as usual,

Dear Lewis, Your affectionate M. BRAMBLE,

After having been agitated in a short hurricane, on my first arrival,
I have taken a small house in Milsham-street, where I am tolerably well
lodged, for five guineas a week. I was yesterday at the Pump-room, and
drank about a pint of water, which seems to agree with my stomach; and
to-morrow morning I shall bathe, for the first time; so that in a few
posts you may expect farther trouble; mean while, I am glad to find that
the inoculation has succeeded so well with poor Joyce, and that her face
will be but little marked. If my friend Sir Thomas was a single man,
I would not trust such a handsome wench in his family; but as I have
recommended her, in a particular manner, to the protection of lady G--,
who is one of the best women in the world, she may go thither without
hesitation as soon as she is quite recovered and fit for service--Let
her mother have money to provide her with necessaries, and she may ride
behind her brother on Bucks; but you must lay strong injunctions
on Jack, to take particular care of the trusty old veteran, who has
faithfully earned his present ease by his past services.




To Miss WILLIS at Gloucester. BATH, April 26. MY DEAREST COMPANION,

The pleasure I received from yours, which came to hand yesterday, is
not to be expressed. Love and friendship are, without doubt, charming
passions; which absence serves only to heighten and improve. Your kind
present of the garnet bracelets, I shall keep as carefully as I preserve
my own life; and I beg you will accept, in return, my heart-housewife,
with the tortoise-shell memorandum-book, as a trifling pledge of my
unalterable affection.

Bath is to me a new world--All is gayety, good-humour, and diversion.
The eye is continually entertained with the splendour of dress and
equipage; and the ear with the sound of coaches, chairs, and other
carriages. The merry bells ring round, from morn till night. Then we
are welcomed by the city-waits in our own lodgings; we have music in the
Pump-room every morning, cotillons every forenoon in the rooms, balls
twice a week, and concerts every other night, besides private assemblies
and parties without number--As soon as we were settled in lodgings, we
were visited by the Master of the Ceremonies; a pretty little gentleman,
so sweet, so fine, so civil, and polite, that in our country he might
pass for the prince of Wales; then he talks so charmingly, both in verse
and prose, that you would be delighted to hear him discourse; for you
must know he is a great writer, and has got five tragedies ready for the
stage. He did us the favour to dine with us, by my uncle's invitation;
and next day squired my aunt and me to every part of Bath; which, to be
sure, is an earthly paradise. The Square, the Circus, and the Parades,
put you in mind of the sumptuous palaces represented in prints and
pictures; and the new buildings, such as Princes-row, Harlequin's-row,
Bladud's-row, and twenty other rows, look like so many enchanted
castles, raised on hanging terraces.

At eight in the morning, we go in dishabille to the Pump-room which is
crowded like a Welsh fair; and there you see the highest quality,
and the lowest trades folks, jostling each other, without ceremony,
hail-fellow well-met. The noise of the music playing in the gallery,
the heat and flavour of such a crowd, and the hum and buz of their
conversation, gave me the head-ach and vertigo the first day; but,
afterwards, all these things became familiar, and even agreeable.--Right
under the Pump-room windows is the King's Bath; a huge cistern, where
you see the patients up to their necks in hot water. The ladies wear
jackets and petticoats of brown linen with chip hats, in which they
fix their handkerchiefs to wipe the sweat from their faces; but, truly,
whether it is owing to the steam that surrounds them, or the heat of the
water, or the nature of the dress, or to all these causes together, they
look so flushed, and so frightful, that I always turn my eyes another
way--My aunt, who says every person of fashion should make her
appearance in the bath, as well as in the abbey church, contrived a cap
with cherry-coloured ribbons to suit her complexion, and obliged Win to
attend her yesterday morning in the water. But, really, her eyes were so
red, that they made mine water as I viewed her from the Pump-room; and
as for poor Win, who wore a hat trimmed with blue, what betwixt her wan
complexion and her fear, she looked like the ghost of some pale maiden,
who had drowned herself for love. When she came out of the bath, she
took assafoetida drops, and was fluttered all day; so that we could
hardly keep her from going into hysterics: but her mistress says it will
do her good; and poor Win curtsies, with the tears in her eyes. For
my part, I content myself with drinking about half a pint of the water
every morning.

The pumper, with his wife and servant, attend within a bar; and the
glasses, of different sizes, stand ranged in order before them, so you
have nothing to do but to point at that which you choose, and it is
filled immediately, hot and sparkling from the pump. It is the only
hot water I could ever drink, without being sick--Far from having that
effect, it is rather agreeable to the taste, grateful to the stomach,
and reviving to the spirits. You cannot imagine what wonderful cures it
performs--My uncle began with it the other day; but he made wry faces in
drinking, and I'm afraid he will leave it off--The first day we came to
Bath, he fell into a violent passion; beat two black-a-moors, and I was
afraid he would have fought with their master; but the stranger proved
a peaceable man. To be sure, the gout had got into his head, as my aunt
observed; but, I believe, his passion drove it away; for he has been
remarkably well ever since. It is a thousand pities he should ever be
troubled with that ugly distemper; for, when he is free from pain, he is
the best tempered man upon earth; so gentle, so generous, so charitable,
that every body loves him; and so good to me, in particular, that I
shall never be able to shew the deep sense I have of his tenderness and
affection.

Hard by the Pump-room, is a coffee-house for the ladies; but my aunt
says, young girls are not admitted, insomuch as the conversation
turns upon politics, scandal, philosophy, and other subjects above
our capacity; but we are allowed to accompany them to the booksellers'
shops, which are charming places of resort; where we read novels, plays,
pamphlets, and newspapers, for so small a subscription as a crown a
quarter; and in these offices of intelligence (as my brother calls them)
all the reports of the day, and all the private transactions of the
Bath, are first entered and discussed. From the bookseller's shop, we
make a tour through the milliners and toymen; and commonly stop at Mr
Gill's, the pastry-cook, to take a jelly, a tart, or a small bason of
vermicelli. There is, moreover, another place of entertainment on the
other side of the water, opposite to the Grove, to which the company
cross over in a boat--It is called Spring-garden; a sweet retreat,
laid out in walks and ponds, and parterres of flowers; and there is
a long-room for breakfasting and dancing. As the situation is low and
damp, and the season has been remarkably wet, my uncle won't suffer me
to go thither, lest I should catch cold: but my aunt says it is all a
vulgar prejudice; and, to be sure, a great many gentlemen and ladies of
Ireland frequent the place, without seeming to be the worse for it. They
say, dancing at Spring-gardens, when the air is moist, is recommended to
them as an excellent cure for the rheumatism. I have been twice at
the play; where, notwithstanding the excellence of the performers, the
gayety of the company, and the decorations of the theatre, which are
very fine, I could not help reflecting, with a sigh, upon our poor
homely representations at Gloucester--But this, in confidence to my dear
Willis--You know my heart, and will excuse its weakness.

After all, the great scenes of entertainment at Bath, are the two
public rooms; where the company meet alternately every evening. They are
spacious, lofty, and, when lighted up, appear very striking. They are
generally crowded with well-dressed people, who drink tea in separate
parties, play at cards, walk, or sit and chat together, just as they are
disposed. Twice a-week there is a ball; the expence of which is defrayed
by a voluntary subscription among the gentlemen; and every subscriber
has three tickets. I was there Friday last with my aunt, under the care
of my brother, who is a subscriber; and Sir Ulic Mackilligut recommended
his nephew, captain O Donaghan, to me as a partner; but Jery excused
himself, by saying I had got the head-ach; and, indeed, it was really
so, though I can't imagine how he knew it. The place was so hot, and the
smell so different from what we are used to in the country, that I was
quite feverish when we came away. Aunt says it is the effect of a vulgar
constitution, reared among woods and mountains; and, that as I become
accustomed to genteel company, it will wear off.--Sir Ulic was very
complaisant, made her a great many high-flown compliments; and, when
we retired, handed her with great ceremony to her chair. The captain, I
believe, would have done me the same favour; but my brother seeing him
advance, took me under his arm, and wished him good night. The Captain
is a pretty man, to be sure; tall and strait, and well made; with
light-grey eyes, and a Roman nose; but there is a certain boldness in
his look and manner, that puts one out of countenance--But I am afraid
I have put you out of all patience with this long unconnected scrawl;
which I shall therefore conclude, with assuring you, that neither Bath,
nor London, nor all the diversions of life, shall ever be able to efface
the idea of my dear Letty, from the heart of her ever affectionate

LYDIA MELFORD




To Mrs MARY JONES, at Brambleton-hall.

DEAR MOLLY JONES,

Heaving got a frank, I now return your fever, which I received by Mr
Higgins, at the Hot Well, together with the stockings, which his wife
footed for me; but now they are of no survice. No body wears such things
in this place--O Molly! you that live in the country have no deception
of our doings at Bath. Here is such dressing, and fidling, and dancing,
and gadding, and courting and plotting--O gracious! if God had not
given me a good stock of discretion, what a power of things might not
I reveal, consarning old mistress and young mistress; Jews with beards
that were no Jews; but handsome Christians, without a hair upon their
sin, strolling with spectacles, to get speech of Miss Liddy. But she's
a dear sweet soul, as innocent as the child unborn. She has tould me all
her inward thoughts, and disclosed her passion for Mr Wilson; and that's
not his name neither; and thof he acted among the player-men, he is meat
for their masters; and she has gi'en me her yallow trollopea; which Mrs
Drab, the mantymaker, says will look very well when it is scowred and
smoaked with silfur--You knows as how, yallow fitts my fizzogmony. God
he knows what havock I shall make among the mail sex, when I make my
first appearance in this killing collar, with a full soot of gaze, as
good as new, that I bought last Friday of madam Friponeau, the French
mullaner--Dear girl, I have seen all the fine shews of Bath; the Prades,
the Squires, and the Circlis, the Crashit, the Hottogon, and Bloody
Buildings, and Harry King's row; and I have been twice in the Bath with
mistress, and na'r a smoak upon our backs, hussy. The first time I was
mortally afraid, and flustered all day; and afterwards made believe that
I had got the heddick; but mistress said, if I didn't go I should take
a dose of bumtaffy; and so remembering how it worked Mrs Gwyllim a
pennorth, I chose rather to go again with her into the Bath, and then I
met with an axident. I dropt my petticoat, and could not get it up from
the bottom.--But what did that signify; they mought laff but they could
see nothing; for I was up to the sin in water. To be sure, it threw me
into such a gumbustion, that I know not what I said, nor what I did, nor
how they got me out, and rapt me in a blanket--Mrs Tabitha scoulded a
little when we got home; but she knows as I know what's what Ah Laud
help you!--There is Sir Yury Micligut, of Balnaclinch, in the cunty of
Kalloway--I took down the name from his gentleman, Mr 0 Frizzle, and he
has got an estate of fifteen hundred a year--I am sure he is both rich
and generous--But you nose, Molly, I was always famous for keeping
secrets; and so he was very safe in trusting me with his flegm for
mistress; which, to be sure is very honourable; for Mr O Frizzle assures
me, he values not her portion a brass varthing--And, indeed, what's poor
ten thousand pounds to a Baron Knight of his fortune? and, truly, I told
Mr 0 Frizzle that was all she had trust to--As for John Thomas, he's
a morass fellor--I vow, I thought he would a fit with Mr 0 Frizzle,
because he axed me to dance with him at Spring Garden--But God he knows
I have no thoughts eyther of wan or t'other.

As for house news, the worst is, Chowder has fallen off greatly from
his stomick--He cats nothing but white meats, and not much of that;
and wheezes, and seems to be much bloated. The doctors think he
is threatened with a dropsy--Parson Marrofat, who has got the same
disorder, finds great benefit from the waters; but Chowder seems to like
them no better than the squire; and mistress says, if his case don't
take a favourable turn, she will sartinly carry him to Aberga'ny, to
drink goat's whey--To be sure, the poor dear honymil is lost for want of
axercise; for which reason, she intends to give him an airing once a-day
upon the Downs, in a post-chaise--I have already made very creditable
connexions in this here place; where, to be sure, we have the very
squintasense of satiety--Mrs Patcher, my lady Kilmacullock's woman, and
I are sworn sisters. She has shewn me all her secrets, and learned me to
wash gaze, and refrash rusty silks and bumbeseens, by boiling them with
winegar, chamberlye, and stale beer. My short sack and apron luck as
good as new from the shop, and my pumpydoor as fresh as a rose, by
the help of turtle-water--But this is all Greek and Latten to you,
Molly--If we should come to Aberga'ny, you'll be within a day's ride of
us; and then we shall see wan another, please God--If not, remember
me in your prayers, as I shall do by you in mine; and take care of my
kitten, and give my kind sarvice to Sall; and this is all at present,
from your beloved friend and sarvent,

W. JENKINS BATH, April 26.




To Mrs GWYLLIM, house-keeper at Brambleton-hall.

I am astonished that Dr Lewis should take upon him to give away
Alderney, without my privity and concurrants--What signifies my
brother's order? My brother is little better than Noncompush. He would
give away the shirt off his back, and the teeth out of his head; nay, as
for that matter; he would have ruinated the family with his ridiculous
charities, if it had not been for my four quarters--What between his
willfullness and his waste, his trumps, and his frenzy, I lead the life
of an indented slave. Alderney gave four gallons a-day, ever since the
calf was sent to market. There is so much milk out of my dairy, and the
press must stand still: but I won't loose a cheese pairing; and the milk
shall be made good, if the sarvents should go without butter. If they
must needs have butter, let them make it of sheep's milk; but then my
wool will suffer for want of grace; so that I must be a loser on all
sides. Well, patience is like a stout Welsh poney; it bears a great
deal, and trots a great way; but it will tire at the long run. Before
its long, perhaps I may shew Matt, that I was not born to be the
household drudge to my dying day--Gwyn rites from Crickhowel, that the
price of flannel is fallen three-farthings an ell; and that's another
good penny out of my pocket. When I go to market to sell, my commodity
stinks; but when I want to buy the commonest thing, the owner pricks
it up under my nose; and it can't be had for love nor money--I think
everything runs cross at Brambleton-hall--You say the gander has broke
the eggs; which is a phinumenon I don't understand: for when the fox
carried off the old goose last year, he took her place, and hatched the
eggs, and partected the goslings like a tender parent--Then you tell me
the thunder has soured two barrels of beer in the seller. But how the
thunder should get there, when the seller was double-locked, I can't
comprehend. Howsomever, I won't have the beer thrown out, till I see it
with my own eyes. Perhaps, it will recover--At least it will serve for
vinegar to the servants.--You may leave off the fires in my brother's
chamber and mine, as it is unsartain when we return.--I hope, Gwyllim,
you'll take care there is no waste; and have an eye to the maids, and
keep them to their spinning. I think they may go very well without beer
in hot weather--it serves only to inflame the blood, and set them
a-gog after the men. Water will make them fair and keep them cool and
tamperit. Don't forget to put up in the portmantel, that cums with
Williams, along with my riding-habit, hat, and feather, the viol of purl
water, and the tincktur for my stomach; being as how I am much troubled
with flutterencies. This is all at present, from

Yours, TABITHA BRAMBLE BATH, April 26.




To Dr LEWIS.

DEAR DICK,

I have done with the waters; therefore your advice comes a day too late
I grant that physic is no mystery of your making. I know it is a mystery
in its own nature; and, like other mysteries, requires a strong gulp of
faith to make it go down--Two days ago, I went into the King's Bath,
by the advice of our friend Ch--, in order to clear the strainer of the
skin, for the benefit of a free perspiration; and the first object that
saluted my eye, was a child full of scrophulous ulcers, carried in the
arms of one of the guides, under the very noses of the bathers. I was
so shocked at the sight, that I retired immediately with indignation
and disgust--Suppose the matter of those ulcers, floating on the water,
comes in contact with my skin, when the pores are all open, I would ask
you what must be the consequence?--Good Heaven, the very thought makes
my blood run cold! we know not what sores may be running into the water
while we are bathing, and what sort of matter we may thus imbibe; the
king's-evil, the scurvy, the cancer, and the pox; and, no doubt, the
heat will render the virus the more volatile and penetrating. To purify
myself from all such contamination, I went to the duke of Kingston's
private Bath, and there I was almost suffocated for want of free air;
the place was so small, and the steam so stifling.

After all, if the intention is no more than to wash the skin, I
am convinced that simple element is more effectual than any water
impregnated with salt and iron; which, being astringent, will certainly
contract the pores, and leave a kind of crust upon the surface of the
body. But I am now as much afraid of drinking, as of bathing; for, after
a long conversation with the Doctor, about the construction of the
pump and the cistern, it is very far from being clear with me, that the
patients in the Pump-room don't swallow the scourings of the bathers. I
can't help suspecting, that there is, or may be, some regurgitation from
the bath into the cistern of the pump. In that case, what a delicate
beveridge is every day quaffed by the drinkers; medicated with the sweat
and dirt, and dandriff; and the abominable discharges of various kinds,
from twenty different diseased bodies, parboiling in the kettle below.
In order to avoid this filthy composition, I had recourse to the spring
that supplies the private baths on the Abbey-green; but I at once
perceived something extraordinary in the taste and smell; and, upon
inquiry, I find that the Roman baths in this quarter, were found covered
by an old burying ground, belonging to the Abbey; through which, in all
probability, the water drains in its passage; so that as we drink the
decoction of living bodies at the Pump-room, we swallow the strainings
of rotten bones and carcasses at the private bath. I vow to God, the
very idea turns my stomach! Determined, as I am, against any farther use
of the Bath waters, this consideration would give me little disturbance,
if I could find any thing more pure, or less pernicious, to quench my
thirst; but, although the natural springs of excellent water are seen
gushing spontaneous on every side, from the hills that surround us, the
inhabitants, in general, make use of well-water, so impregnated with
nitre, or alum, or some other villainous mineral, that it is equally
ungrateful to the taste, and mischievous to the constitution. It must
be owned, indeed, that here, in Milsham-street, we have a precarious and
scanty supply from the hill; which is collected in an open bason in
the Circus, liable to be defiled with dead dogs, cats, rats, and every
species of nastiness, which the rascally populace may throw into it,
from mere wantonness and brutality. Well, there is no nation that drinks
so hoggishly as the English.

What passes for wine among us, is not the juice of the grape. It is an
adulterous mixture, brewed up of nauseous ingredients, by dunces,
who are bunglers in the art of poison-making; and yet we, and our
forefathers, are and have been poisoned by this cursed drench, without
taste or flavour--The only genuine and wholesome beveridge in England,
is London porter, and Dorchester table-beer; but as for your ale and
your gin, your cyder and your perry, and all the trashy family of
made wines, I detest them as infernal compositions, contrived for the
destruction of the human species--But what have I to do with the human
species? except a very few friends, I care not if the whole was--.

Heark ye, Lewis, my misanthropy increases every day--The longer I
live, I find the folly and the fraud of mankind grow more and more
intolerable--I wish I had not come from Brambletonhall; after having
lived in solitude so long, I cannot bear the hurry and impertinence of
the multitude; besides, every thing is sophisticated in these crowded
places. Snares are laid for our lives in every thing we cat or drink:
the very air we breathe, is loaded with contagion. We cannot even
sleep, without risque of infection. I say, infection--This place is
the rendezvous of the diseased--You won't deny, that many diseases are
infectious; even the consumption itself, is highly infectious. When a
person dies of it in Italy, the bed and bedding are destroyed; the other
furniture is exposed to the weather and the apartment white-washed,
before it is occupied by any other living soul. You'll allow, that
nothing receives infection sooner, or retains it longer, than blankets,
feather-beds, and matrasses--'Sdeath! how do I know what miserable
objects have been stewing in the bed where I now lie!--I wonder, Dick,
you did not put me in mind of sending for my own matrasses--But, if I
had not been an ass, I should not have needed a remembrancer--There is
always some plaguy reflection that rises up in judgment against me, and
ruffles my spirits--Therefore, let us change the subject.

I have other reasons for abridging my stay at Bath--You know sister
Tabby's complexion--If Mrs Tabitha Bramble had been of any other race,
I should certainly have considered her as the most--. But, the truth
is, she has found means to interest my affection; or, rather, she is
beholden to the force of prejudice, commonly called the ties of
blood. Well, this amiable maiden has actually commenced a flirting
correspondence with an Irish baronet of sixty-five. His name is Sir Ulic
Mackilligut. He is said to be much out at elbows; and, I believe, has
received false intelligence with respect to her fortune. Be that as
it may, the connexion is exceedingly ridiculous, and begins already
to excite whispers. For my part, I have no intention to dispute her
free-agency; though I shall fall upon some expedient to undeceive her
paramour, as to the point which he has principally in view. But I don't
think her conduct is a proper example for Liddy, who has also attracted
the notice of some coxcombs in the Rooms; and Jery tells me, he suspects
a strapping fellow, the knight's nephew, of some design upon the girl's
heart. I shall, therefore, keep a strict eye over her aunt and her,
and even shift the scene, if I find the matter grow more serious--You
perceive what an agreeable task it must be, to a man of my kidney, to
have the cure of such souls as these.--But, hold, You shall not have
another peevish word (till the next occasion) from

Yours, MATT. BRAMBLE BATH, April 28.




To Sir WATKIN PHILLIPS, of Jesus college, Oxon.

DEAR KNIGHT,

I think those people are unreasonable, who complain that Bath is a
contracted circle, in which the same dull scenes perpetually revolve,
without variation--I am, on the contrary, amazed to find so small a
place so crowded with entertainment and variety. London itself can
hardly exhibit one species of diversion, to which we have not something
analogous at Bath, over and above those singular advantages that are
peculiar to the place. Here, for example, a man has daily opportunities
of seeing the most remarkable characters of the community. He sees
them in their natural attitudes and true colours; descended from their
pedestals, and divested of their formal draperies, undisguised by art
and affectation--Here we have ministers of state, judges, generals,
bishops, projectors, philosophers, wits, poets, players, chemists,
fiddlers, and buffoons. If he makes any considerable stay in the place,
he is sure of meeting with some particular friend, whom he did not
expect to see; and to me there is nothing more agreeable than such
casual reencounters. Another entertainment, peculiar to Bath, arises
from the general mixture of all degrees assembled in our public
rooms, without distinction of rank or fortune. This is what my uncle
reprobates, as a monstrous jumble of heterogeneous principles; a vile
mob of noise and impertinence, without decency or subordination. But
this chaos is to me a source of infinite amusement.

I was extremely diverted last ball-night to see the Master of the
Ceremonies leading, with great solemnity, to the upper end of the room,
an antiquated Abigail, dressed in her lady's cast-clothes; whom he (I
suppose) mistook for some countess just arrived at the Bath. The
ball was opened by a Scotch lord, with a mulatto heiress from St
Christopher's; and the gay colonel Tinsel danced all the evening
with the daughter of an eminent tinman from the borough of Southwark.
Yesterday morning, at the Pump-room, I saw a broken-winded
Wapping landlady squeeze through a circle of peers, to salute her
brandy-merchant, who stood by the window, propped upon crutches; and a
paralytic attorney of Shoe-lane, in shuffling up to the bar, kicked the
shins of the chancellor of England, while his lordship, in a cut bob,
drank a glass of water at the pump. I cannot account for my being
pleased with these incidents, any other way, than by saying they are
truly ridiculous in their own nature, and serve to heighten the humour
in the farce of life, which I am determined to enjoy as long as I can.

Those follies, that move my uncle's spleen, excite my laughter. He is
as tender as a man without a skin; who cannot bear the slightest touch
without flinching. What tickles another would give him torment; and
yet he has what we may call lucid intervals, when he is remarkably
facetious--Indeed, I never knew a hypochondriac so apt to be infected
with good-humour. He is the most risible misanthrope I ever met with.
A lucky joke, or any ludicrous incident, will set him a-laughing
immoderately, even in one of his most gloomy paroxysms; and, when the
laugh is over, he will curse his own imbecility. In conversing with
strangers, he betrays no marks of disquiet--He is splenetic with his
familiars only; and not even with them, while they keep his attention
employed; but when his spirits are not exerted externally, they seem
to recoil and prey upon himself--He has renounced the waters with
execration; but he begins to find a more efficacious, and, certainly,
a much more palatable remedy in the pleasures of society. He has
discovered some old friends, among the invalids of Bath; and, in
particular, renewed his acquaintance with the celebrated James Quin, who
certainly did not come here to drink water. You cannot doubt, but that I
had the strongest curiosity to know this original; and it was gratified
by Mr Bramble, who has had him twice at our house to dinner.

So far as I am able to judge, Quin's character is rather more
respectable than it has been generally represented. His bon mots are in
every witling's mouth; but many of them have a rank flavour, which one
would be apt to think was derived from a natural grossness of idea.
I suspect, however, that justice has not been done the author, by the
collectors of those Quiniana; who have let the best of them slip through
their fingers, and only retained such as were suited to the taste and
organs of the multitude. How far he may relax in his hours of jollity, I
cannot pretend to say; but his general conversation is conducted by the
nicest rules of Propriety; and Mr James Quin is, certainly, one of the
best bred men in the kingdom. He is not only a most agreeable companion
but (as I am credibly informed) a very honest man; highly susceptible
of friendship, warm, steady, and even generous in his attachments,
disdaining flattery, and incapable of meanness and dissimulation. Were I
to judge, however, from Quin's eye alone, I should take him to be proud,
insolent, and cruel. There is something remarkably severe and forbidding
in his aspect; and, I have been told, he was ever disposed to insult his
inferiors and dependants.--Perhaps that report has influenced my opinion
of his looks--You know we are the fools of prejudice. Howsoever that may
be, I have as yet seen nothing but his favourable side, and my uncle,
who frequently confers with him, in a corner, declares he is one of the
most sensible men he ever knew--He seems to have a reciprocal regard for
old Squaretoes, whom he calls by the familiar name of Matthew, and often
reminds of their old tavern-adventures: on the other hand, Matthew's
eyes sparkle whenever Quin makes his appearance--Let him be never so
jarring and discordant, Quin puts him in tune; and, like treble and bass
in the same concert, they make excellent music together--. T'other day,
the conversation turning upon Shakespeare, I could not help saying, with
some emotion, that I would give an hundred guineas to see Mr Quin act
the part of Falstaff; upon which, turning to me with a smile, 'And I
would give a thousand, young gentleman (said he) that I could gratify
your longing.' My uncle and he are perfectly agreed in their estimate of
life; which Quin says, would stink in his nostrils, if he did not steep
it in claret.

I want to see this phenomenon in his cups; and have almost prevailed
upon uncle to give him a small turtle at the Bear. In the mean time, I
must entertain you with an incident, that seems to confirm the judgment
of those two cynic philosophers. I took the liberty to differ in opinion
from Mr Bramble, when he observed, that the mixture of people in the
entertainments of this place was destructive of all order and urbanity;
that it rendered the plebeians insufferably arrogant and troublesome,
and vulgarized the deportment and sentiments of those who moved in the
upper spheres of life. He said such a preposterous coalition would bring
us into contempt with all our neighbours; and was worse, in fact, than
debasing the gold coin of the nation. I argued, on the contrary, that
those plebeians who discovered such eagerness to imitate the dress and
equipage of their superiors, would likewise, in time, adopt their maxims
and their manners, be polished by their conversation, and refined by
their example; but when I appealed to Mr Quin, and asked if he did not
think that such an unreserved mixture would improve the whole mass? 'Yes
(said he) as a plate of marmalade would improve a pan of sirreverence.'

I owned I was not much conversant in high-life, but I had seen what were
called polite assemblies in London and elsewhere; that those of Bath
seemed to be as decent as any; and that, upon the whole, the individuals
that composed it, would not be found deficient in good manners and
decorum. 'But let us have recourse to experience (said I)--Jack Holder,
who was intended for a parson, has succeeded to an estate of two
thousand a year, by the death of his elder brother. He is now at the
Bath, driving about in a phaeton and four, with French horns. He has
treated with turtle and claret at all the taverns in Bath and Bristol,
till his guests are gorged with good chear: he has bought a dozen suits
of fine clothes, by the advice of the Master of the Ceremonies, under
whose tuition he has entered himself. He has lost hundreds at billiards
to sharpers, and taken one of the nymphs of Avon-street into keeping;
but, finding all these channels insufficient to drain him of his current
cash, his counsellor has engaged him to give a general tea-drinking
to-morrow at Wiltshire's room. In order to give it the more eclat, every
table is to be furnished with sweet-meats and nosegays; which, however,
are not to be touched till notice is given by the ringing of a bell, and
then the ladies may help themselves without restriction. This will be no
bad way of trying the company's breeding.'

'I will abide by that experiment (cried my uncle) and if I could find
a place to stand secure, without the vortex of the tumult, which I know
will ensue, I would certainly go thither and enjoy the scene.' Quin
proposed that we should take our station in the music-gallery, and
we took his advice. Holder had got thither before us, with his horns
perdue, but we were admitted. The tea-drinking passed as usual, and the
company having risen from the tables, were sauntering in groupes, in
expectation of the signal for attack, when the bell beginning to
ring, they flew with eagerness to the dessert, and the whole place was
instantly in commotion. There was nothing but justling, scrambling,
pulling, snatching, struggling, scolding, and screaming. The nosegays
were torn from one another's hands and bosoms; the glasses and china
went to wreck; the tables and floors were strewed with comfits. Some
cried; some swore; and the tropes and figures of Billingsgate were used
without reserve in all their native zest and flavour; nor were those
flowers of rhetoric unattended with significant gesticulation. Some
snapped their fingers; some forked them out; some clapped their hands,
and some their back-sides; at length, they fairly proceeded to pulling
caps, and every thing seemed to presage a general battle; when Holder
ordered his horns to sound a charge, with a view to animate the
combatants, and inflame the contest; but this manoeuvre produced an
effect quite contrary to what he expected. It was a note of reproach
that roused them to an immediate sense of their disgraceful situation.
They were ashamed of their absurd deportment, and suddenly desisted.
They gathered up their caps, ruffles, and handkerchiefs; and great part
of them retired in silent mortification.

Quin laughed at this adventure; but my uncle's delicacy was hurt. He
hung his head in manifest chagrin, and seemed to repine at the triumph
of his judgment--Indeed, his victory was more complete than he imagined;
for, as we afterwards learned, the two amazons who singularized
themselves most in the action, did not come from the purlieus of
Puddle-dock, but from the courtly neighbourhood of St James's palace.
One was a baroness, and the other, a wealthy knight's dowager--My uncle
spoke not a word, till we had made our retreat good to the coffee-house;
where, taking off his hat and wiping his forehead, 'I bless God (said
he) that Mrs Tabitha Bramble did not take the field today!' 'I would pit
her for a cool hundred (cried Quin) against the best shake-bag of the
whole main.' The truth is, nothing could have kept her at home but the
accident of her having taken physic before she knew the nature of the
entertainment. She has been for some days furbishing up an old suit of
black velvet, to make her appearance as Sir Ulic's partner at the next
ball.

I have much to say of this amiable kinswoman; but she has not been
properly introduced to your acquaintance. She is remarkably civil to
Mr Quin; of whose sarcastic humour she seems to stand in awe; but her
caution is no match for her impertinence. 'Mr Gwynn (said she the other
day) I was once vastly entertained with your playing the Ghost of Gimlet
at Drury-lane, when you rose up through the stage, with a white face and
red eyes, and spoke of quails upon the frightful porcofine--Do, pray,
spout a little the Ghost of Gimlet.' 'Madam (said Quin, with a glance of
ineffable disdain) the Ghost of Gimlet is laid, never to rise again'--
Insensible of this check, she proceeded: 'Well, to be sure, you looked
and talked so like a real ghost; and then the cock crowed so natural.
I wonder how you could teach him to crow so exact, in the very nick of
time; but, I suppose, he's game--An't he game, Mr Gwynn?' 'Dunghill,
madam.'--'Well, dunghill, or not dunghill, he has got such a clear
counter-tenor, that I wish I had such another at Brambleton-hall, to
wake the maids of a morning. Do you know where I could find one of his
brood?' 'Probably in the work-house at St Giles's parish, madam; but I
protest I know not his particular mew!' My uncle, frying with vexation,
cried, 'Good God, sister, how you talk! I have told you twenty times,
that this gentleman's name is not Gwynn.'--'Hoity toity, brother mine
(she replied) no offence, I hope--Gwynn is an honorable name, of true
old British extraction--I thought the gentleman had been come of Mrs
Helen Gwynn, who was of his own profession; and if so be that were the
case, he might be of king Charles's breed, and have royal blood in his
veins.'--'No, madam (answered Quin, with great solemnity) my mother was
not a whore of such distinction--True it is, I am sometimes tempted
to believe myself of royal descent; for my inclinations are often
arbitrary--If I was an absolute prince, at this instant, I believe I
should send for the head of your cook in a charger--She has committed
felony, on the person of that John Dory, which is mangled in a cruel
manner, and even presented without sauce--O tempora! O mores!'

This good-humoured sally turned the conversation into a less
disagreeable channel--But, lest you should think my scribble as tedious
as Mrs Tabby's clack, I shall not add another word, but that I am as
usual

Yours, J. MELFORD BATH, April 30.




To Dr LEWIS.

DEAR LEWIS,

I received your bill upon Wiltshire, which was punctually honoured; but
as I don't choose to keep so much cash by me, in a common lodging house,
I have deposited 250l. in the bank of Bath, and shall take their bills
for it in London, when I leave this place, where the season draws to an
end--You must know, that now being a-foot, I am resolved to give Liddy a
glimpse of London. She is one of the best hearted creatures I ever knew,
and gains upon my affection every day--As for Tabby, I have dropt such
hints to the Irish baronet, concerning her fortune, as, I make no doubt,
will cool the ardour of his addresses. Then her pride will take the
alarm; and the rancour of stale maidenhood being chafed, we shall hear
nothing but slander and abuse of Sir Ulic Mackilligut--This rupture,
I foresee, will facilitate our departure from Bath; where, at present,
Tabby seems to enjoy herself with peculiar satisfaction. For my part, I
detest it so much, that I should not have been able to stay so long in
the place if I had not discovered some old friends; whose conversation
alleviates my disgust--Going to the coffeehouse one forenoon, I
could not help contemplating the company, with equal surprize and
compassion--We consisted of thirteen individuals; seven lamed by the
gout, rheumatism, or palsy; three maimed by accident; and the rest
either deaf or blind. One hobbled, another hopped, a third dragged his
legs after him like a wounded snake, a fourth straddled betwixt a pair
of long crutches, like the mummy of a felon hanging in chains; a fifth
was bent into a horizontal position, like a mounted telescope, shoved in
by a couple of chairmen; and a sixth was the bust of a man, set upright
in a wheel machine, which the waiter moved from place to place.

Being struck with some of their faces, I consulted the
subscription-book; and, perceiving the names of several old friends,
began to consider the groupe with more attention. At length I discovered
rear-admiral Balderick, the companion of my youth, whom I had not seen
since he was appointed lieutenant of the Severn. He was metamorphosed
into an old man, with a wooden leg and a weatherbeaten face, which
appeared the more ancient from his grey locks, that were truly
venerable--Sitting down at the table, where he was reading a news-paper,
I gazed at him for some minutes, with a mixture of pleasure and regret,
which made my heart gush with tenderness; then, taking him by the hand,
'Ah, Sam (said I) forty years ago I little thought'--I was too much
moved to proceed. 'An old friend, sure enough! (cried he, squeezing my
hand, and surveying me eagerly through his glasses) I know the looming
of the vessel, though she has been hard strained since we parted; but I
can't heave up the name'--The moment I told him who I was, he exclaimed,
'Ha! Matt, my old fellow cruizer, still afloat!' And, starting up,
hugged me in his arms. His transport, however, boded me no good; for, in
saluting me, he thrust the spring of his spectacles into my eye, and,
at the same time, set his wooden stump upon my gouty toe; an attack that
made me shed tears in sad earnest--After the hurry of our recognition
was over, he pointed out two of our common friends in the room: the bust
was what remained of colonel Cockril, who had lost the use of his
limbs in making an American campaign; and the telescope proved to be
my college chum, sir Reginald Bently; who, with his new title, and
unexpected inheritance, commenced fox-hunter, without having served
his apprenticeship to the mystery; and, in consequence of following the
hounds through a river, was seized with an inflammation of his bowels,
which has contracted him into his present attitude.

Our former correspondence was forthwith renewed, with the most hearty
expressions of mutual good-will, and as we had met so unexpectedly, we
agreed to dine together that very day at the tavern. My friend Quin,
being luckily unengaged, obliged us with his company; and, truly, this
the most happy day I have passed these twenty years. You and I, Lewis,
having been always together, never tasted friendship in this high gout,
contracted from long absence. I cannot express the half of what I felt
at this casual meeting of three or four companions, who had been so
long separated, and so roughly treated by the storms of life. It was a
renovation of youth; a kind of resuscitation of the dead, that realized
those interesting dreams, in which we sometimes retrieve our ancient
friends from the grave. Perhaps my enjoyment was not the less pleasing
for being mixed with a strain of melancholy, produced by the remembrance
of past scenes, that conjured up the ideas of some endearing connexions,
which the hand of Death has actually dissolved.

The spirits and good humour of the company seemed to triumph over the
wreck of their constitutions. They had even philosophy enough to
joke upon their own calamities; such is the power of friendship, the
sovereign cordial of life--I afterwards found, however, that they were
not without their moments, and even hours of disquiet. Each of them
apart, in succeeding conferences, expatiated upon his own particular
grievances; and they were all malcontents at bottom--Over and above
their personal disasters, they thought themselves unfortunate in the
lottery of life. Balderick complained, that all the recompence he
had received for his long and hard service, was the half-pay of a
rear-admiral. The colonel was mortified to see himself over-topped by
upstart generals, some of whom he had once commanded; and, being a man
of a liberal turn, could ill put up with a moderate annuity, for which
he had sold his commission. As for the baronet, having run himself
considerably in debt, on a contested election, he has been obliged to
relinquish his seat in parliament, and his seat in the country at the
same time, and put his estate to nurse; but his chagrin, which is the
effect of his own misconduct, does not affect me half so much as that of
the other two, who have acted honourable and distinguished parts on the
great theatre, and are now reduced to lead a weary life in this stew-pan
of idleness and insignificance. They have long left off using the
waters, after having experienced their inefficacy. The diversions of the
place they are not in a condition to enjoy. How then do they make shift
to pass their time? In the forenoon they crawl out to the Rooms or
the coffeehouse, where they take a hand at whist, or descant upon the
General Advertiser; and their evenings they murder in private parties,
among peevish invalids, and insipid old women--This is the case with
a good number of individuals, whom nature seems to have intended for
better purposes.

About a dozen years ago, many decent families, restricted to small
fortunes, besides those that came hither on the score of health, were
tempted to settle at Bath, where they could then live comfortably, and
even make a genteel appearance, at a small expence: but the madness of
the times has made the place too hot for them, and they are now obliged
to think of other migrations--Some have already fled to the mountains
of Wales, and others have retired to Exeter. Thither, no doubt, they
will be followed by the flood of luxury and extravagance, which will
drive them from place to place to the very Land's End; and there, I
suppose, they will be obliged to ship themselves to some other country.
Bath is become a mere sink of profligacy and extortion. Every article of
house-keeping is raised to an enormous price; a circumstance no longer
to be wondered at, when we know that every petty retainer of fortune
piques himself upon keeping a table, and thinks it is for the honour
of his character to wink at the knavery of his servants, who are in a
confederacy with the market-people; and, of consequence, pay whatever
they demand. Here is now a mushroom of opulence, who pays a cook seventy
guineas a week for furnishing him with one meal a day. This portentous
frenzy is become so contagious, that the very rabble and refuse of
mankind are infected. I have known a negro-driver, from Jamaica, pay
over-night, to the master of one of the rooms, sixty-five guineas for
tea and coffee to the company, and leave Bath next morning, in such
obscurity, that not one of his guests had the slightest idea of his
person, or even made the least inquiry about his name. Incidents of this
kind are frequent; and every day teems with fresh absurdities, which are
too gross to make a thinking man merry.

--But I feel the spleen creeping on me apace; and therefore will indulge
you with a cessation, that you may have no unnecessary cause to curse
your correspondence with,

Dear Dick, Yours ever, MAT. BRAMBLE BATH, May 5.




To Miss LAETITIA WILLIS, at Gloucester.

MY DEAR LETTY,

I wrote you at great length by the post, the twenty-sixth of last month,
to which I refer you for an account of our proceedings at Bath; and I
expect your answer with impatience. But, having this opportunity of a
private hand, I send you two dozen of Bath rings; six of the best of
which I desire you will keep for yourself, and distribute the rest among
the young ladies, our common friends, as you shall think proper--I don't
know how you will approve of the mottoes; some of them are not much
to my own liking; but I was obliged to take such as I could find ready
manufactured--I am vexed, that neither you nor I have received any
further information of a certain person--Sure it cannot be wilful
neglect!--O my dear Willis! I begin to be visited by strange fancies,
and to have some melancholy doubts; which, however, it would be
ungenerous to harbour without further inquiry--My uncle, who has made
me a present of a very fine set of garnets, talks of treating us with a
jaunt to London; which, you may imagine, will be highly agreeable; but
I like Bath so well, that I hope he won't think of leaving it till the
season is quite over; and yet, betwixt friends, something has happened
to my aunt, which will probably shorten our stay in this place.

Yesterday, in the forenoon, she went by herself to a breakfasting in one
of the rooms; and, in half an hour, returned in great agitation, having
Chowder along with her in the chair. I believe some accident must have
happened to that unlucky animal, which is the great source of all her
troubles. Dear Letty! what a pity it is, that a woman of her years
and discretion, should place her affection upon such an ugly,
ill-conditioned cur, that snarls and snaps at every body. I asked John
Thomas, the footman who attended her, what was the matter? and he did
nothing but grin. A famous dog-doctor was sent for, and undertook to
cure the patient, provided he might carry him home to his own house; but
his mistress would not part with him out of her own sight--She ordered
the cook to warm cloths, which she applied to his bowels, with her own
hand. She gave up all thoughts of going to the ball in the evening; and
when Sir Ulic came to drink tea, refused to be seen; so that he went
away to look for another partner. My brother Jery whistles and dances.
My uncle sometimes shrugs up his shoulders, and sometimes bursts out
a-laughing. My aunt sobs and scolds by turns; and her woman, Win.
Jenkins, stares and wonders with a foolish face of curiosity; and, for
my part, I am as curious as she, but ashamed to ask questions.

Perhaps time will discover the mystery; for if it was any thing that
happened in the Rooms, it cannot be long concealed--All I know is, that
last night at supper, miss Bramble spoke very disdainfully of Sir Ulic
Mackilligut, and asked her brother if he intended to keep us sweltering
all the summer at Bath? 'No, sister Tabitha (said he, with an arch
smile) we shall retreat before the Dog-days begin; though I make no
doubt, that with a little temperance and discretion, our constitutions
might be kept cool enough all the year, even at Bath.' As I don't know
the meaning of this insinuation, I won't pretend to make any remarks
upon it at present: hereafter, perhaps, I may be able to explain it more
to your satisfaction--In the mean time, I beg you will be punctual in
your correspondence, and continue to love your ever faithful

LYDIA MELFORD BATH, May 6.




To Sir WATKIN PHILLIPS, of Jesus college, Oxon.

So then Mrs Blackerby's affair has proved a false alarm, and I have
saved my money? I wish, however, her declaration had not been so
premature; for though my being thought capable of making her a mother,
might have given me some credit, the reputation of an intrigue with such
a cracked pitcher does me no honour at all In my last I told you I had
hopes of seeing Quin, in his hours of elevation at the tavern which is
the temple of mirth and good fellowship; where he, as priest of Comus,
utters the inspirations of wit and humour--I have had that satisfaction.
I have dined with his club at the Three Tuns, and had the honour to sit
him out. At half an hour past eight in the evening, he was carried
home with six good bottles of claret under his belt; and it being then
Friday, he gave orders that he should not be disturbed till Sunday at
noon--You must not imagine that this dose had any other effect upon his
conversation, but that of making it more extravagantly entertaining--He
had lost the use of his limbs, indeed, several hours before we parted,
but he retained all his other faculties in perfection; and as he gave
vent to every whimsical idea as it rose, I was really astonished at the
brilliancy of his thoughts, and the force of his expression. Quin is a
real voluptuary in the articles of eating and drinking; and so confirmed
an epicure, in the common acceptation of the term, that he cannot put up
with ordinary fare. This is a point of such importance with him, that he
always takes upon himself the charge of catering; and a man admitted
to his mess, is always sure of eating delicate victuals, and drinking
excellent wine--He owns himself addicted to the delights of the stomach,
and often jokes upon his own sensuality; but there is nothing selfish in
this appetite--He finds that good chear unites good company, exhilerates
the spirits, opens the heart, banishes all restraint from conversation,
and promotes the happiest purposes of social life. But Mr James Quin
is not a subject to be discussed in the compass of one letter; I shall
therefore, at present, leave him to his repose, and call another of a
very different complexion.

You desire to have further acquaintance with the person of our aunt,
and promise yourself much entertainment from her connexion with Sir Ulic
Mackilligut: but in this hope you are baulked already; that connexion is
dissolved. The Irish baronet is an old hound, that, finding her carrion,
has quitted the scent--I have already told you, that Mrs Tabitha Bramble
is a maiden of forty-five. In her person, she is tall, raw-boned,
aukward, flat-chested, and stooping; her complexion is sallow and
freckled; her eyes are not grey, but greenish, like those of a cat, and
generally inflamed; her hair is of a sandy, or rather dusty hue; her
forehead low; her nose long, sharp, and, towards the extremity, always
red in cool weather; her lips skinny, her mouth extensive, her teeth
straggling and loose, of various colours and conformation; and her long
neck shrivelled into a thousand wrinkles--In her temper, she is proud,
stiff, vain, imperious, prying, malicious, greedy, and uncharitable. In
all likelihood, her natural austerity has been soured by disappointment
in love; for her long celibacy is by no means owing to her dislike of
matrimony: on the contrary, she has left no stone unturned to avoid the
reproachful epithet of old maid.

Before I was born, she had gone such lengths in the way of flirting
with a recruiting officer, that her reputation was a little singed. She
afterwards made advances to the curate of the parish, who dropped some
distant hints about the next presentation to the living, which was in
her brother's gift; but finding that was already promised to another, he
flew off at a tangent; and Mrs Tabby, in revenge, found means to deprive
him of his cure. Her next lover was lieutenant of a man of war, a
relation of the family, who did not understand the refinements of the
passion, and expressed no aversion to grapple with cousin Tabby in the
way of marriage; but before matters could be properly adjusted, he went
out on a cruise, and was killed in an engagement with a French frigate.
Our aunt, though baffled so often, did not yet despair. She layed all
her snares for Dr Lewis, who is the fidus Achates of my uncle. She even
fell sick upon the occasion, and prevailed with Matt to interpose in her
behalf with his friend; but the Doctor, being a shy cock, would not be
caught with chaff, and flatly rejected the proposal: so that Mrs Tabitha
was content to exert her patience once more, after having endeavoured
in vain to effect a rupture betwixt the two friends; and now she thinks
proper to be very civil to Lewis, who is become necessary to her in the
way of his profession.

These, however, are not the only efforts she has made towards a nearer
conjunction with our sex. Her fortune was originally no more than a
thousand pounds; but she gained an accession of five hundred by the
death of a sister, and the lieutenant left her three hundred in his
will. These sums she has more than doubled, by living free of all
expence, in her brother's house; and dealing in cheese and Welsh
flannel, the produce of his flocks and dairy. At present her capital is
increased to about four thousand pounds; and her avarice seems to grow
every day more and more rapacious: but even this is not so intolerable
as the perverseness of her nature, which keeps the whole family
in disquiet and uproar. She is one of those geniuses who find
some diabolical enjoyment in being dreaded and detested by their
fellow-creatures.

I once told my uncle, I was surprised that a man of his disposition
could bear such a domestic plague, when it could be so easily removed.
The remark made him sore, because it seemed to tax him with want of
resolution--Wrinkling up his nose, and drawing down his eye-brows, 'A
young fellow (said he) when he first thrusts his snout into the world,
is apt to be surprised at many things which a man of experience knows
to be ordinary and unavoidable--This precious aunt of yours is become
insensibly a part of my constitution--Damn her! She's a noli me tangere
in my flesh, which I cannot bear to be touched or tampered with.' I made
no reply; but shifted the conversation. He really has an affection for
this original; which maintains its ground in defiance of common sense,
and in despite of that contempt which he must certainly feel for her
character and understanding. Nay, I am convinced, that she has likewise
a most virulent attachment to his person; though her love never shews
itself but in the shape of discontent; and she persists in tormenting
him out of pure tenderness--The only object within doors upon which she
bestows any marks of affection, in the usual stile, is her dog Chowder;
a filthy cur from Newfoundland, which she had in a present from the wife
of a skipper in Swansey. One would imagine she had distinguished this
beast with her favour on account of his ugliness and ill-nature, if it
was not, indeed, an instinctive sympathy, between his disposition and
her own. Certain it is, she caresses him without ceasing; and even
harasses the family in the service of this cursed animal, which, indeed,
has proved the proximate cause of her breach with Sir Ulic Mackilligut.

You must know, she yesterday wanted to steal a march of poor Liddy, and
went to breakfast in the Room without any other companion than her dog,
in expectation of meeting with the Baronet, who had agreed to dance with
her in the evening--Chowder no sooner made his appearance in the Room,
than the Master of the Ceremonies, incensed at his presumption, ran
up to drive him away, and threatened him with his foot; but the other
seemed to despise his authority, and displaying a formidable case of
long, white, sharp teeth, kept the puny monarch at bay--While he stood
under some trepidation, fronting his antagonist, and bawling to the
waiter, Sir Ulic Mackilligut came to his assistance; and seeming
ignorant of the connexion between this intruder and his mistress, gave
the former such a kick in the jaws, as sent him howling to the door--Mrs
Tabitha, incensed at this outrage, ran after him, squalling in a tone
equally disagreeable; while the Baronet followed her on one side,
making apologies for his mistake; and Derrick on the other, making
remonstrances upon the rules and regulations of the place.

Far from being satisfied with the Knight's excuses, she said she was
sure he was no gentleman; and when the Master of the Ceremonies offered
to hand her into the chair, she rapped him over the knuckles with her
fan. My uncle's footman being still at the door, she and Chowder got
into the same vehicle, and were carried off amidst the jokes of the
chairmen and other populace--I had been riding out on Clerkendown, and
happened to enter just as the fracas was over--The Baronet, coming up to
me with an affected air of chagrin, recounted the adventure; at which
I laughed heartily, and then his countenance cleared up. 'My dear soul
(said he) when I saw a sort of a wild baist, snarling with open mouth
at the Master of the Ceremonies, like the red cow going to devour Tom
Thumb, I could do no less than go to the assistance of the little man;
but I never dreamt the baist was one of Mrs Bramble's attendants--O! if
I had, he might have made his breakfast upon Derrick and welcome--But
you know, my dear friend, how natural it is for us Irishmen to blunder,
and to take the wrong sow by the ear--However, I will confess judgment,
and cry her mercy; and it is to be hoped, a penitent sinner may be
forgiven.' I told him, that as the offence was not voluntary of his
side, it was to be hoped he would not find her implacable.

But, in truth, all this concern was dissembled. In his approaches of
gallantry to Mrs Tabitha, he had been misled by a mistake of at least
six thousand pounds, in the calculation of her fortune; and in this
particular he was just undeceived. He, therefore, seized the first
opportunity of incurring her displeasure decently, in such a manner as
would certainly annihilate the correspondence; and he could not have
taken a more effectual method, than that of beating her dog. When he
presented himself at our door, to pay his respects to the offended fair,
he was refused admittance, and given to understand that he should never
find her at home for the future. She was not so inaccessible to Derrick,
who came to demand satisfaction for the insult she had offered to him,
even in the verge of his own court. She knew it was convenient to be
well with the Master of the Ceremonies, while she continued to frequent
the Rooms; and, having heard he was a poet, began to be afraid of making
her appearance in a ballad or lampoon.--She therefore made excuses
for what she had done, imputing it to the flutter of her spirits; and
subscribed handsomely for his poems: so that he was perfectly appeased,
and overwhelmed her with a profusion of compliment. He even solicited a
reconciliation with Chowder; which, however, the latter declined; and he
declared, that if he could find a precedent in the annals of the Bath,
which he would carefully examine for that purpose, her favourite should
be admitted to the next public breakfasting--But, I, believe, she will
not expose herself or him to the risque of a second disgrace--Who will
supply the place of Mackilligut in her affections, I cannot foresee;
but nothing in the shape of man can come amiss. Though she is a violent
church-woman, of the most intolerant zeal, I believe in my conscience
she would have no objection, at present, to treat on the score of
matrimony with an Anabaptist, Quaker, or Jew; and even ratify the treaty
at the expense of her own conversion. But, perhaps, I think too hardly
of this kinswoman; who, I must own, is very little beholden to the good
opinion of

Yours, J. MELFORD BATH, May 6.




To Dr LEWIS.

You ask me, why I don't take the air a-horseback, during this fine
weather?--In which of the avenues of this paradise would you have me
take that exercise? Shall I commit myself to the high-roads of London
or Bristol, to be stifled with dust, or pressed to death in the midst
of post-chaises, flying-machines, waggons, and coal-horses; besides
the troops of fine gentlemen that take to the highway, to shew their
horsemanship; and the coaches of fine ladies, who go thither to shew
their equipages? Shall I attempt the Downs, and fatigue myself to death
in climbing up an eternal ascent, without any hopes of reaching the
summit? Know then, I have made divers desperate leaps at those upper
regions; but always fell backward into this vapour-pit, exhausted
and dispirited by those ineffectual efforts; and here we poor
valetudinarians pant and struggle, like so many Chinese gudgeons,
gasping in the bottom of a punch-bowl. By Heaven it is a kind of
enchantment! If I do not speedily break the spell, and escape, I may
chance to give up the ghost in this nauseous stew of corruption--It was
but two nights ago, that I had like to have made my public exit, at a
minute's warning. One of my greatest weaknesses is that of suffering
myself to be over-ruled by the opinion of people, whose judgment I
despise--I own, with shame and confusion of face, that importunity
of any kind I cannot resist. This want of courage and constancy is an
original flaw in my nature, which you must have often observed with
compassion, if not with contempt. I am afraid some of our boasted
virtues maybe traced up to this defect.

Without further preamble, I was persuaded to go to a ball, on purpose to
see Liddy dance a minuet with a young petulant jackanapes, the only
son of a wealthy undertaker from London, whose mother lodges in our
neighbourhood, and has contracted an acquaintance with Tabby. I sat a
couple of long hours, half stifled, in the midst of a noisome crowd;
and could not help wondering that so many hundreds of those that rank as
rational creatures, could find entertainment in seeing a succession of
insipid animals, describing the same dull figure for a whole evening, on
an area, not much bigger than a taylor's shop-board. If there had been
any beauty, grace, activity, magnificent dress, or variety of any kind
howsoever absurd, to engage the attention, and amuse the fancy, I should
not have been surprised; but there was no such object: it was a tiresome
repetition of the same languid, frivolous scene, performed by actors
that seemed to sleep in all their motions. The continual swimming of
these phantoms before my eyes, gave me a swimming of the head; which was
also affected by the fouled air, circulating through such a number of
rotten human bellows. I therefore retreated towards the door, and stood
in the passage to the next room, talking to my friend Quin; when an end
being put to the minuets, the benches were removed to make way for the
country-dances; and the multitude rising at once, the whole atmosphere
was put in commotion. Then, all of a sudden, came rushing upon me an
Egyptian gale, so impregnated with pestilential vapours, that my nerves
were overpowered, and I dropt senseless upon the floor.

You may easily conceive what a clamour and confusion this accident must
have produced, in such an assembly--I soon recovered, however, and found
myself in an easy chair, supported by my own people--Sister Tabby, in
her great tenderness, had put me to the torture, squeezing my hand under
her arm, and stuffing my nose with spirit of hartshorn, till the whole
inside was excoriated. I no sooner got home, than I sent for Doctor
Ch--, who assured me I needed not be alarmed, for my swooning was
entirely occasioned by an accidental impression of fetid effluvia upon
nerves of uncommon sensibility. I know not how other people's nerves
are constructed; but one would imagine they must be made of very coarse
materials, to stand the shock of such a torrid assault. It was, indeed,
a compound of villainous smells, in which the most violent stinks,
and the most powerful perfumes, contended for the mastery. Imagine to
yourself a high exalted essence of mingled odours, arising from putrid
gums, imposthumated lungs, sour flatulencies, rank armpits, sweating
feet, running sores and issues, plasters, ointments, and embrocations,
hungary-water, spirit of lavender, assafoetida drops, musk, hartshorn,
and sal volatile; besides a thousand frowzy steams, which I could not
analyse. Such, O Dick! is the fragrant aether we breathe in the polite
assemblies of Bath--Such is the atmosphere I have exchanged for the
pure, elastic, animating air of the Welsh mountains--O Rus, quando te
aspiciam!---I wonder what the devil possessed me--

But few words are best: I have taken my resolution--You may well suppose
I don't intend to entertain the company with a second exhibition--I have
promised, in an evil hour, to proceed to London, and that promise shall
be performed, but my stay in the metropolis shall be brief. I have, for
the benefit of my health, projected an expedition to the North, which, I
hope, will afford some agreeable pastime. I have never travelled farther
that way than Scarborough; and, I think, it is a reproach upon me, as a
British freeholder, to have lived so long without making an excursion to
the other side of the Tweed. Besides, I have some relations settled in
Yorkshire, to whom it may not be improper to introduce my nephew and
his sister--At present, I have nothing to add, but that Tabby is happily
disentangled from the Irish Baronet; and that I will not fail to make
you acquainted, from time to time, with the sequel of our adventures: a
mark of consideration, which, perhaps, you would willingly dispense with
in

Your humble servant, M. BRAMBLE BATH, May 8.




To Sir WATKIN PHILLIPS, of Jesus college, Oxon.

DEAR PHILLIPS,

A few days ago we were terribly alarmed by my uncle's fainting at the
ball--He has been ever since cursing his own folly, for going thither at
the request of an impertinent woman. He declares, he will sooner visit
a house infected with the plague, than trust himself in such a nauseous
spital for the future, for he swears the accident was occasioned by the
stench of the crowd; and that he would never desire a stronger proof of
our being made of very gross materials, than our having withstood the
annoyance, by which he was so much discomposed. For my part, I am very
thankful for the coarseness of my organs, being in no danger of
ever falling a sacrifice to the delicacy of my nose. Mr Bramble is
extravagantly delicate in all his sensations, both of soul and body. I
was informed by Dr Lewis, that he once fought a duel with an officer
of the horseguards, for turning aside to the Park-wall, on a necessary
occasion, when he was passing with a lady under his protection. His
blood rises at every instance of insolence and cruelty, even where he
himself is no way concerned; and ingratitude makes his teeth chatter. On
the other hand, the recital of a generous, humane, or grateful action,
never fails to draw from him tears of approbation, which he is often
greatly distressed to conceal.

Yesterday, one Paunceford gave tea, on particular invitation--This man,
after having been long buffetted by adversity, went abroad; and Fortune,
resolved to make him amends for her former coyness, set him all at once
up to the very ears in affluence. He has now emerged from obscurity,
and blazes out in all the tinsel of the times. I don't find that he is
charged with any practices that the law deems dishonest, or that his
wealth has made him arrogant and inaccessible; on the contrary, he
takes great pains to appear affable and gracious. But, they say, he
is remarkable for shrinking from his former friendships, which were
generally too plain and home-spun to appear amidst his present brilliant
connexions; and that he seems uneasy at sight of some old benefactors,
whom a man of honour would take pleasure to acknowledge--Be that as it
may, he had so effectually engaged the company at Bath, that when I went
with my uncle to the coffeehouse in the evening, there was not a soul
in the room but one person, seemingly in years, who sat by the fire,
reading one of the papers. Mr Bramble, taking his station close by
him, 'There is such a crowd and confusion of chairs in the passage to
Simpson's (said he) that we could hardly get along--I wish those
minions of fortune would fall upon more laudable ways of spending their
money.--I suppose, Sir, you like this kind of entertainment as little as
I do?' 'I cannot say I have any great relish for such entertainments,'
answered the other, without taking his eyes off the paper--'Mr Serle
(resumed my uncle) I beg pardon for interrupting you; but I can't resist
the curiosity I have to know if you received a card on this occasion?'

The man seemed surprised at this address, and made some pause, as
doubtful what answer he should make. 'I know my curiosity is impertinent
(added my uncle) but I have a particular reason for asking the favour.'
'If that be the case (replied Mr Serle) I shall gratify you without
hesitation, by owning that I have had no card. But, give me leave,
Sir, to ask in my turn, what reason you think I have to expect such an
invitation from the gentleman who gives tea?' 'I have my own reasons
(cried Mr Bramble, with some emotion) and am convinced, more than ever,
that this Paunceford is a contemptible fellow.' 'Sir (said the other,
laying down the paper) I have not the honour to know you; but your
discourse is a little mysterious, and seems to require some explanation.
The person you are pleased to treat so cavalierly, is a gentleman of
some consequence in the community; and, for aught you know, I may also
have my particular reasons for defending his character'--'If I was not
convinced of the contrary (observed the other) I should not have gone so
far'--'Let me tell you, Sir (said the stranger, raising his voice) you
have gone too far, in hazarding such reflections'.

Here he was interrupted by my uncle; who asked peevishly if he was
Don Quixote enough, at this time of day, to throw down his gauntlet as
champion for a man who had treated him with such ungrateful neglect.
'For my part (added he) I shall never quarrel with you again upon this
subject; and what I have said now, has been suggested as much by my
regard for you, as by my contempt of him'--Mr Serle, then pulling off
his spectacles, eyed uncle very earnestly, saying, in a mitigated
tone, 'Surely I am much obliged--Ah, Mr Bramble! I now recollect your
features, though I have not seen you these many years.' 'We might
have been less strangers to one another (answered the squire) if
our correspondence had not been interrupted, in consequence of a
misunderstanding, occasioned by this very--, but no matter--Mr Serle, I
esteem your character; and my friendship, such as it is, you may freely
command.' 'The offer is too agreeable to be declined (said he); I
embrace it very cordially; and, as the first fruits of it, request that
you will change this subject, which, with me, is a matter of peculiar
delicacy.'

My uncle owned he was in the right, and the discourse took a more
general turn. Mr Serle passed the evening with us at our lodgings; and
appeared to be intelligent, and even entertaining; but his disposition
was rather of a melancholy hue. My uncle says he is a man of uncommon
parts, and unquestioned probity: that his fortune, which was originally
small, has been greatly hurt by a romantic spirit of generosity, which
he has often displayed, even at the expence of his discretion, in favour
of worthless individuals--That he had rescued Paunceford from the lowest
distress, when he was bankrupt, both in means and reputation--That
he had espoused his interests with a degree of enthusiasm, broke with
several friends, and even drawn his sword against my uncle, who had
particular reasons for questioning the moral character of the said
Paunceford: that, without Serle's countenance and assistance, the other
never could have embraced the opportunity, which has raised him to this
pinnacle of wealth: that Paunceford, in the first transports of his
success, had written, from abroad, letters to different correspondents,
owning his obligations to Mr Serle, in the warmest terms of
acknowledgement, and declared he considered himself only as a factor
for the occasions of his best friend: that, without doubt, he had made
declarations of the same nature to his benefactor himself, though this
last was always silent and reserved on the subject; but for some years,
those tropes and figures of rhetoric had been disused; that, upon his
return to England, he had been lavish in his caresses to Mr Serle,
invited him to his house, and pressed him to make it his own: that he
had overwhelmed him with general professions, and affected to express
the warmest regard for him, in company of their common acquaintance; so
that every body believed his gratitude was liberal as his fortune; and
some went so far as to congratulate Mr Serle on both.

All this time Paunceford carefully and artfully avoided particular
discussions with his old patron, who had too much spirit to drop
the most distant hint of balancing the account of obligation: that,
nevertheless, a man of his feelings could not but resent this shocking
return for all his kindness: and, therefore, he withdrew himself from
the connexion, without coming to the least explanation or speaking
a syllable on the subject to any living soul; so that now their
correspondence is reduced to a slight salute with the hat, when they
chance to meet in any public place; an accident that rarely happens, for
their walks lie different ways. Mr Paunceford lives in a palace, feeds
upon dainties, is arrayed in sumptuous apparel, appears in all the pomp
of equipage, and passes his time among the nobles of the land. Serle
lodges in Stall-street, up two pair of stairs backwards, walks a-foot
in a Bath-rug, eats for twelve shillings a-week, and drinks water
as preservative against the gout and gravel--Mark the vicissitude.
Paunceford once resided in a garret; where he subsisted upon
sheep's-trotters and cow-heel, from which commons he was translated to
the table of Serle, that ever abounded with good-chear; until want of
economy and retention reduced him to a slender annuity in his decline of
years, that scarce affords the bare necessaries of life.--Paunceford,
however, does him the honour to speak of him still, with uncommon
regard; and to declare what pleasure it would give him to contribute in
any shape to his convenience: 'But you know (he never fails to add) he's
a shy kind of a man--And then such a perfect philosopher, that he looks
upon all superfluities with the most sovereign contempt. Having given
you this sketch of squire Paunceford, I need not make any comment on his
character, but leave it at the mercy of your own reflection; from which
I dare say, it will meet with as little quarter as it has found with

Yours always, J. MELFORD BATH, May 10.




To Mrs MARY JONES, at Brambleton-hall.

DEAR MOLLY,

We are all upon the ving--Hey for London, girl!--Fecks! we have been
long enough here; for we're all turned tipsy turvy--Mistress has
excarded Sir Ulic for kicking of Chowder; and I have sent O Frizzle
away, with a flea in his ear--I've shewn him how little I minded his
tinsy and his long tail--A fellor, who would think for to go, for to
offer, to take up with a dirty trollop under my nose--I ketched him in
the very feet, coming out of the housemaids garret.--But I have gi'en
the dirty slut a siserary. O Molly! the sarvants at Bath are devils
in garnet. They lite the candle at both ends--Here's nothing but
ginketting, and wasting, and thieving and tricking, and trigging; and
then they are never content--They won't suffer the 'squire and mistress
to stay any longer; because they have been already above three weeks in
the house; and they look for a couple of ginneys a-piece at our going
away; and this is a parquisite they expect every month in the season;
being as how no family has a right to stay longer than four weeks in
the same lodgings; and so the cuck swears she will pin the dish-clout to
mistress's tail; and the house-maid vows, she'll put cowitch in master's
bed, if so be he don't discamp without furder ado--I don't blame
them for making the most of their market, in the way of vails and
parquisites; and I defy the devil to say I am a tail-carrier, or ever
brought a poor sarvant into trouble--But then they oft to have some
conscience, in vronging those that be sarvants like themselves--For you
must no, Molly, I missed three-quarters of blond lace, and a remnant
of muslin, and my silver thimble; which was the gift of true love;
they were all in my workbasket, that I left upon the table in the
sarvants-hall, when mistresses bell rung; but if they had been under
lock and kay, 'twould have been all the same; for there are double keys
to all the locks in Bath; and they say as how the very teeth an't
safe in your head, if you sleep with your mouth open--And so says I to
myself, them things could not go without hands; and so I'll watch
their waters: and so I did with a vitness; for then it was I found Bett
consarned with O Frizzle. And as the cuck had thrown her slush at me,
because I had taken part with Chowder, when he fit, with the turnspit,
I resolved to make a clear kitchen, and throw some of her fat into the
fire. I ketched the chare-woman going out with her load in the morning,
before she thought I was up, and brought her to mistress with her whole
cargo--Marry, what do'st think she had got in the name of God? Her
buckets were foaming full of our best bear, and her lap was stuffed with
a cold tongue, part of a buttock of beef, half a turkey, and a swinging
lump of butter, and the matter of ten mould kandles, that had scarce
ever been lit. The cuck brazened it out, and said it was her rite to
rummage the pantry; and she was ready for to go before the mare: that
he had been her potticary many years, and would never think of hurting a
poor sarvant, for giving away the scraps of the kitchen. I went another
way to work with madam Betty, because she had been saucy, and called me
skandelus names; and said O Frizzle couldn't abide me, and twenty other
odorous falsehoods. I got a varrant from the mare, and her box being
sarched by the constable, my things came out sure enuff; besides a full
pound of vax candles, and a nite-cap of mistress, that I could sware to
on my cruperal oaf--O! then madam Mopstick came upon her merry
bones; and as the squire wouldn't hare of a pursecution, she scaped a
skewering: but the longest day she has to live, she'll remember your

Humble sarvant, W. JENKINS BATH, May 15.

If the hind should come again, before we be gone, pray send me the shift
and apron, with the vite gallow manky shoes; which you'll find in my
pillowber--Sarvice to Saul--




To Sir WATKIN PHILLIPS, Bart. of Jesus college, Oxon.

You are in the right, dear Phillips; I don't expect regular answers
to every letter--I know a college-life is too circumscribed to afford
materials for such quick returns of communication. For my part, I am
continually shifting the scene, and surrounded with new objects; some
of which are striking enough. I shall therefore conclude my journal for
your amusement; and, though, in all appearance, it will not treat of
very important or interesting particulars, it may prove, perhaps, not
altogether uninstructive and unentertaining.

The music and entertainments of Bath are over for this season; and
all our gay birds of passage have taken their flight to Bristolwell,
Tunbridge, Brighthelmstone, Scarborough, Harrowgate, &c. Not a soul is
seen in this place, but a few broken-winded parsons, waddling like so
many crows along the North Parade. There is always a great shew of
the clergy at Bath: none of your thin, puny, yellow, hectic figures,
exhausted with abstinence, and hardy study, labouring under the morbi
eruditorum, but great overgrown dignitaries and rectors, with rubicund
noses and gouty ancles, or broad bloated faces, dragging along great
swag bellies; the emblems of sloth and indigestion.

Now we are upon the subject of parsons, I must tell you a ludicrous
adventure, which was achieved the other day by Tom Eastgate, whom you
may remember on the foundation of Queen's. He had been very assiduous
to pin himself upon George Prankley, who was a gentleman-commoner of
Christchurch, knowing the said Prankley was heir to a considerable
estate, and would have the advowson of a good living, the incumbent of
which was very old and infirm. He studied his passions, and flattered
them so effectually, as to become his companion and counsellor; and,
at last, obtained of him a promise of the presentation, when the living
should fall. Prankley, on his uncle's death, quitted Oxford, and made
his first appearance in the fashionable world at London; from whence
he came lately to Bath, where he has been exhibiting himself among the
bucks and gamesters of the place. Eastgate followed him hither; but he
should not have quitted him for a moment, at his first emerging into
life. He ought to have known he was a fantastic, foolish, fickle
fellow, who would forget his college-attachments the moment they ceased
appealing to his senses. Tom met with a cold reception from his old
friend; and was, moreover, informed, that he had promised the living to
another man, who had a vote in the county, where he proposed to offer
himself a candidate at the next general election. He now remembered
nothing of Eastgate, but the freedoms he had used to take with him,
while Tom had quietly stood his butt, with an eye to the benefice; and
those freedoms he began to repeat in common-place sarcasms on his person
and his cloth, which he uttered in the public coffeehouse, for the
entertainment of the company. But he was egregiously mistaken in
giving his own wit credit for that tameness of Eastgate, which had been
entirely owing to prudential considerations. These being now removed,
he retorted his repartee with interest, and found no great difficulty in
turning the laugh upon the aggressor; who, losing his temper, called him
names, and asked, If he knew whom he talked to? After much altercation,
Prankley, shaking his cane, bid him hold his tongue, otherwise he could
dust his cassock for him. 'I have no pretensions to such a valet (said
Tom) but if you should do me that office, and overheat yourself, I have
here a good oaken towel at your service.'

Prankley was equally incensed and confounded at this reply. After a
moment's pause, he took him aside towards die window; and, pointing to
the clump of firs, on Clerken-down, asked in a whisper, if he had
spirit enough to meet him there, with a case of pistols, at six o'clock
tomorrow morning. Eastgate answered in the affirmative; and, with a
steady countenance, assured him, he would not fail to give him the
rendezvous at the hour he mentioned. So saying, he retired; and the
challenger stayed some time in manifest agitation. In the morning,
Eastgate, who knew his man, and had taken his resolution, went to
Prankley's lodgings, and roused him by five o'clock.

The squire, in all probability, cursed his punctuality in his heart, but
he affected to talk big; and having prepared his artillery overnight,
they crossed the water at the end of the South Parade. In their progress
up the hill, Prankley often eyed the parson, in hopes of perceiving
some reluctance in his countenance; but as no such marks appeared, he
attempted to intimidate him by word of mouth. 'If these flints do their
office (said he) I'll do thy business in a few minutes.' 'I desire you
will do your best (replied the other); for my part, I come not here to
trifle. Our lives are in the hands of God; and one of us already totters
on the brink of eternity' This remark seemed to make some impression
upon the squire, who changed countenance, and with a faultering accent
observed, 'That it ill became a clergyman to be concerned in quarrels
and bloodshed'--'Your insolence to me (said Eastgate) I should have bore
with patience, had not you cast the most infamous reflections upon my
order, the honour of which I think myself in duty bound to maintain,
even at the expence of my heart's blood; and surely it can be no crime
to put out of the world a profligate wretch, without any sense of
principle, morality, or religion'--'Thou may'st take away my life (cried
Prankley, in great perturbation) but don't go to murder my character.
What! has't got no conscience?' 'My conscience is perfectly quiet
(replied the other); and now, Sir, we are upon the spot--Take your
ground as near as you please; prime your pistol; and the Lord, of his
infinite mercy, have compassion upon your miserable soul!'

This ejaculation he pronounced in a loud solemn tone, with his hat off,
and his eyes lifted up; then drawing a large horse-pistol, he presented,
and put himself in a posture of action. Prankley took his distance, and
endeavoured to prime, but his hand shook with such violence, that he
found this operation impracticable--His antagonist, seeing how it was
with him, offered his assistance, and advanced for that purpose; when
the poor squire, exceedingly alarmed at what he had heard and seen,
desired the action might be deferred till next day, as he had not
settled his affairs. 'I ha'n't made my will (said he); my sisters are
not provided for; and I just now recollect an old promise, which my
conscience tells me I ought to perform--I'll first convince thee,
that I'm not a wretch without principle, and then thou shalt have an
opportunity to take my life, which thou seem'st to thirst after so
eagerly.'

Eastgate understood the hint; and told him, that one day should break no
squares: adding, 'God forbid that I should be the means of hindering you
from acting the part of an honest man, and a dutiful brother'--By virtue
of this cessation, they returned peaceably together. Prankley forthwith
made out the presentation of the living, and delivered it to Eastgate,
telling him at the same time, he had now settled his affairs, and was
ready to attend him to the Fir-grove; but Tom declared he could not
think of lifting his hand against the life of so great a benefactor--He
did more: when they next met at the coffeehouse, he asked pardon of Mr
Prankley, if in his passion he had said any thing to give him offence;
and the squire was so gracious as to forgive him with a cordial shake of
the hand, declaring, that he did not like to be at variance with an old
college companion--Next day, however, he left Bath abruptly; and then
Eastgate told me all these particulars, not a little pleased with the
effects of his own sagacity, by which he has secured a living worth
160l. per annum.

Of my uncle, I have nothing at present to say; but that we set out
tomorrow for London en famille. He and the ladies, with the maid and
Chowder in a coach; I and the man-servant a-horseback. The particulars
of our journey you shall have in my next, provided no accident happens
to prevent,

Yours ever, J. MELFORD BATH May 17.




To Dr LEWIS.

DEAR DICK,

I shall to-morrow set out for London, where I have bespoke lodgings, at
Mrs Norton's in Golden-square. Although I am no admirer of Bath, I shall
leave it with regret; because I must part with some old friends,
whom, in all probability, I shall never see again. In the course of
coffeehouse conversation, I had often heard very extraordinary encomiums
passed on the performances of Mr T--, a gentleman residing in this
place, who paints landscapes for his amusement. As I have no great
confidence in the taste and judgment of coffeehouse connoisseurs, and
never received much pleasure from this branch of the art, those general
praises made no impression at all on my curiosity; but, at the request
of a particular friend, I went yesterday to see the pieces, which had
been so warmly commended--I must own I am no judge of painting, though
very fond of pictures. I don't imagine that my senses would play me so
false, as to betray me into admiration of any thing that was very bad;
but, true it is, I have often overlooked capital beauties, in pieces of
extraordinary merit.--If I am not totally devoid of taste, however, this
young gentleman of Bath is the best landscape-painter now living: I was
struck with his performances in such a manner, as I had never been
by painting before. His trees not only have a richness of foliage
and warmth of colouring, which delights the view; but also a certain
magnificence in the disposition and spirit in the expression, which
I cannot describe. His management of the chiaro oscuro, or light and
shadow, especially gleams of sunshine, is altogether wonderful, both in
the contrivance and execution; and he is so happy in his perspective,
and marking his distances at sea, by a progressive series of ships,
vessels, capes, and promontories, that I could not help thinking, I had
a distant view of thirty leagues upon the back-ground of the picture. If
there is any taste for ingenuity left in a degenerate age, fast sinking
into barbarism, this artist, I apprehend, will make a capital figure, as
soon as his works are known.

Two days ago, I was favoured with a visit by Mr Fitzowen; who, with
great formality, solicited my vote and interest at the general election.
I ought not to have been shocked at the confidence of this man; though
it was remarkable, considering what had passed between him and me on a
former occasion--These visits are mere matter of form, which a candidate
makes to every elector; even to those who, he knows, are engaged in
the interest of his competitor, lest he should expose himself to the
imputation of pride, at a time when it is expected he should appear
humble. Indeed, I know nothing so abject as the behaviour of a
man canvassing for a seat in parliament--This mean prostration (to
borough-electors, especially) has, I imagine, contributed in a great
measure to raise that spirit of insolence among the vulgar; which, like
the devil, will be found very difficult to lay. Be that as it may, I was
in some confusion at the effrontery of Fitzowen; but I soon recollected
myself, and told him, I had not yet determined for whom I should give my
vote, nor whether I should give it for any.--The truth is, I look upon
both candidates in the same light; and should think myself a traitor to
the constitution of my country, if I voted for either. If every elector
would bring the same consideration home to his conscience, we should not
have such reason to exclaim against the venality of p--ts. But we all
are a pack of venal and corrupted rascals; so lost to all sense of
honesty, and all tenderness of character, that, in a little time, I am
fully persuaded, nothing will be infamous but virtue and public-spirit.

G. H--, who is really an enthusiast in patriotism, and represented the
capital in several successive parliaments, declared to me t'other day,
with the tears in his eyes, that he had lived above thirty years in the
city of London, and dealt in the way of commerce with all the citizens
of note in their turns; but that, as he should answer to God, he had
never, in the whole course of his life, found above three or four
whom he could call thoroughly honest: a declaration which was rather
mortifying than surprising to me; who have found so few men of worth
in the course of my acquaintance, that they serve only as exceptions;
which, in the grammarian's phrase, confirm and prove a general canon--I
know you will say, G. H-- saw imperfectly through the mist of prejudice,
and I am rankled by the spleen--Perhaps, you are partly in the right;
for I have perceived that my opinion of mankind, like mercury in the
thermometer, rises and falls according to the variations of the weather.

Pray settle accompts with Barnes; take what money of mine is in his
hands, and give him acquittance. If you think Davis has stock or credit
enough to do justice to the farm, give him a discharge for the rent that
is due, this will animate his industry; for I know that nothing is so
discouraging to a farmer as the thoughts of being in arrears with his
landlord. He becomes dispirited, and neglects his labour; and so the
farm goes to wreck. Tabby has been clamouring for some days about the
lamb's skin, which Williams, the hind, begged of me, when he was last at
Bath. Prithee take it back, paying the fellow the full value of it, that
I may have some peace in my own house; and let him keep his own counsel,
if he means to keep his place--O! I shall never presume to despise or
censure any poor man, for suffering himself to be henpecked; conscious
how I myself am obliged to truckle to a domestic demon; even though
(blessed be God) she is not yoked with me for life, in the matrimonial
waggon--She has quarrelled with the servants of the house about vails;
and such intolerable scolding ensued on both sides, that I have been
fain to appease the cook and chambermaid by stealth. Can't you find some
poor gentleman of Wales, to take this precious commodity off the hands
of

Yours, MATT. BRAMBLE BATH, May 19.




To Dr LEWIS.

DOCTER LEWS,

Give me leaf to tell you, methinks you mought employ your talons better,
than to encourage servants to pillage their masters. I find by Gwyllim,
that Villiams has got my skin; for which he is an impotent rascal. He
has not only got my skin, but, moreover, my butter-milk to fatten his
pigs; and, I suppose, the next thing he gets, will be my pad to carry
his daughter to church and fair: Roger gets this, and Roger gets
that; but I'd have you to know, I won't be rogered at this rate by any
ragmatical fellow in the kingdom--And I am surprised, docter Lews, you
would offer to put my affairs in composition with the refuge and skim
of the hearth. I have toiled and moyled to a good purpuss, for the
advantage of Matt's family, if I can't safe as much owl as will make me
an under petticoat. As for the butter-milk, ne'er a pig in the parish
shall thrust his snout in it, with my good-will. There's a famous
physician at the Hot Well, that prescribes it to his patience, when
the case is consumptive; and the Scots and Irish have begun to drink it
already, in such quantities, that there is not a drop left for the
hogs in the whole neighbourhood of Bristol. I'll have our butter-milk
barrelled up, and sent twice a-week to Aberginny, where it may be sold
for a half-penny the quart; and so Roger may carry his pigs to another
market--I hope, Docter, you will not go to put any more such phims in my
brother's head, to the prejudice of my pockat; but rather give me some
raisins (which hitherto you have not done) to subscribe myself

Your humble servant, TAB. BRAMBLE BATH, May 19.




To Sir WATKIN PHILLIPS, of Jesus college, Oxon.

DEAR PHILLIPS,

Without waiting for your answer to my last, I proceed to give you an
account of our journey to London, which has not been wholly barren of
adventure. Tuesday last the 'squire took his place in a hired coach and
four, accompanied by his sister and mine, and Mrs Tabby's maid, Winifrid
Jenkins, whose province it was to support Chowder on a cushion in
her lap. I could scarce refrain from laughing when I looked into the
vehicle, and saw that animal sitting opposite to my uncle, like any
other passenger. The squire, ashamed of his situation, blushed to the
eyes: and, calling to the postilions to drive on, pulled the glass up in
my face. I, and his servant, John Thomas, attended them on horseback.

Nothing worth mentioning occurred, till we arrived on the edge of
Marlborough Downs. There one of the four horses fell, in going down
hill at a round trot; and the postilion behind, endeavouring to stop
the carriage, pulled it on one side into a deep rut, where it was fairly
overturned. I had rode on about two hundred yards before; but, hearing
a loud scream, galloped back and dismounted, to give what assistance
was in my power. When I looked into the coach, I could see nothing
distinctly, but the nether end of Jenkins, who was kicking her heels and
squalling with great vociferation. All of a sudden, my uncle thrust
up his bare pate, and bolted through the window, as nimble as a
grasshopper, having made use of poor Win's posteriors as a step to rise
in his ascent--The man (who had likewise quitted his horse) dragged this
forlorn damsel, more dead than alive, through the same opening. Then
Mr Bramble, pulling the door off its hinges with a jerk, laid hold
on Liddy's arm, and brought her to the light; very much frighted, but
little hurt. It fell to my share to deliver our aunt Tabitha, who had
lost her cap in the struggle, and being rather more than half frantic,
with rage and terror, was no bad representation of one of the sister
Furies that guard the gates of hell--She expressed no sort of concern
for her brother, who ran about in the cold, without his periwig, and
worked with the most astonishing agility, in helping to disentangle
the horses from the carriage: but she cried, in a tone of distraction,
'Chowder! Chowder! my dear Chowder! my poor Chowder is certainly
killed!'

This was not the case--Chowder, after having tore my uncle's leg in the
confusion of the fall, had retreated under the scat, and from thence the
footman drew him by the neck; for which good office, he bit his fingers
to the bone. The fellow, who is naturally surly, was so provoked at this
assault, that he saluted his ribs with a hearty kick, exclaiming, 'Damn
the nasty son of a bitch, and them he belongs to!' A benediction,
which was by no means lost upon the implacable virago his mistress--Her
brother, however, prevailed upon her to retire into a peasant's house,
near the scene of action, where his head and hers were covered, and poor
Jenkins had a fit. Our next care was to apply some sticking plaister to
the wound in his leg, which exhibited the impression of Chowder's teeth;
but he never opened his lips against the delinquent--Mrs Tabby, alarmed
at this scene, 'You say nothing, Matt (cried she); but I know your
mind--I know the spite you have to that poor unfortunate animal! I know
you intend to take his life away!' 'You are mistaken, upon my honour!
(replied the squire, with a sarcastic smile) I should be incapable
of harbouring any such cruel design against an object so amiable and
inoffensive; even if he had not the happiness to be your favourite.'

John Thomas was not so delicate. The fellow, whether really alarmed for
his life, or instigated by the desire of revenge, came in, and bluntly
demanded, that the dog should be put to death; on the supposition, that
if ever he should run mad hereafter, he, who had been bit by him, would
be infected--My uncle calmly argued upon the absurdity of his opinion,
observing, that he himself was in the same predicament, and would
certainly take the precaution he proposed, if he was not sure he ran no
risque of infection. Nevertheless, Thomas continued obstinate; and, at
length declared, that if the dog was not shot immediately, he himself
would be his executioner--This declaration opened the flood-gates of
Tabby's eloquence, which would have shamed the first-rate oratress of
Billingsgate. The footman retorted in the same stile; and the squire
dismissed him from his service, after having prevented me from giving
him a good horse-whipping for his insolence.

The coach being adjusted, another difficulty occurred--Mrs Tabitha
absolutely refused to enter it again, unless another driver could
be found to take the place of the postilion; who, she affirmed, had
overturned the carriage from malice aforethought--After much dispute,
the man resigned his place to a shabby country fellow, who undertook to
go as far as Marlborough, where they could be better provided; and at
that place we arrived about one O'clock, without farther impediment. Mrs
Bramble, however, found new matter of offence; which, indeed, she has a
particular genius for extracting at will from almost every incident in
life. We had scarce entered the room at Marlborough, where we stayed to
dine, when she exhibited a formal complaint against the poor fellow who
had superseded the postilion. She said he was such a beggarly rascal
that he had ne'er a shirt to his back, and had the impudence to shock
her sight by shewing his bare posteriors, for which act of indelicacy
he deserved to be set in the stocks. Mrs Winifred Jenkins confirmed the
assertion, with respect to his nakedness, observing, at the same time,
that he had a skin as fair as alabaster.

'This is a heinous offence, indeed (cried my uncle) let us hear what the
fellow has to say in his own vindication.' He was accordingly summoned,
and made his appearance, which was equally queer and pathetic. He seemed
to be about twenty years of age, of a middling size, with bandy legs,
stooping shoulders, high forehead, sandy locks, pinking eyes, flat nose,
and long chin--but his complexion was of a sickly yellow; his looks
denoted famine, and the rags that he wore could hardly conceal
what decency requires to be covered--My uncle, having surveyed him
attentively, said, with an ironical expression in his countenance, 'An't
you ashamed, fellow, to ride postilion without a shirt to cover your
backside from the view of the ladies in the coach?' 'Yes, I am, an
please your noble honour (answered the man) but necessity has no law,
as the saying is--And more than that, it was an accident. My breeches
cracked behind, after I had got into the saddle' 'You're an impudent
varlet (cried Mrs Tabby) for presuming to ride before persons of fashion
without a shirt'--'I am so, an please your worthy ladyship (said he)
but I am a poor Wiltshire lad--I ha'n't a shirt in the world, that I can
call my own, nor a rag of clothes, and please your ladyship, but what
you see--I have no friend nor relation upon earth to help me out--I
have had the fever and ague these six months, and spent all I had in the
world upon doctors, and to keep soul and body together; and, saving
your ladyship's good presence, I han't broke bread these four and twenty
hours.'

Mrs Bramble, turning from him, said, she had never seen such a filthy
tatterdemalion, and bid him begone; observing, that he would fill the
room full of vermin--Her brother darted a significant glance at her, as
she retired with Liddy into another apartment, and then asked the man if
he was known to any person in Marlborough?--When he answered, that
the landlord of the inn had known him from his infancy; mine host was
immediately called, and being interrogated on the subject, declared that
the young fellow's name was Humphry Clinker. That he had been a love
begotten babe, brought up in the work-house, and put out apprentice by
the parish to a country black-smith, who died before the boy's time was
out: that he had for some time worked under his ostler, as a helper and
extra postilion, till he was taken ill of the ague, which disabled him
from getting his bread: that, having sold or pawned every thing he had
in the world for his cure and subsistence, he became so miserable and
shabby, that he disgraced the stable, and was dismissed; but that
he never heard any thing to the prejudice of his character in other
respects. 'So that the fellow being sick and destitute (said my uncle)
you turned him out to die in the streets.' 'I pay the poor's rate
(replied the other) and I have no right to maintain idle vagrants,
either in sickness or health; besides, such a miserable object would
have brought a discredit upon my house.'

'You perceive (said the 'squire, turning to me) our landlord is a
Christian of bowels--Who shall presume to censure the morals of the age,
when the very publicans exhibit such examples of humanity?--Heark ye,
Clinker, you are a most notorious offender--You stand convicted of
sickness, hunger, wretchedness, and want--But, as it does not belong to
me to punish criminals, I will only take upon me the task of giving you
a word of advice. Get a shirt with all convenient dispatch, that your
nakedness may not henceforward give offence to travelling gentlewomen,
especially maidens in years.'

So saying, he put a guinea into the hand of the poor fellow, who stood
staring at him in silence, with his mouth wide open, till the landlord
pushed him out of the room.

In the afternoon, as our aunt stept into the coach, she observed, with
some marks of satisfaction, that the postilion, who rode next to
her, was not a shabby wretch like the ragamuffin who had them into
Marlborough. Indeed, the difference was very conspicuous: this was a
smart fellow, with a narrow brimmed hat, with gold cording, a cut bob,
a decent blue jacket, leather-breaches, and a clean linen shirt, puffed
above the waist-band. When we arrived at the Castle, on Spin-hill, where
we lay, this new postilion was remarkably assiduous in bringing in the
loose parcels; and, at length, displayed the individual countenance
of Humphry Clinker, who had metamorphosed himself in this manner, by
relieving from pawn part of his own clothes, with the money he had
received from Mr Bramble.

Howsoever pleased the rest of the company were with such a favourable
change in the appearance of this poor creature it soured on the
stomach of Mrs Tabby, who had not yet digested the affront of his naked
skin--She tossed her nose in disdain, saying, she supposed her brother
had taken him into favour, because he had insulted her with his
obscenity: that a fool and his money were soon parted; but that if Matt
intended to take the fellow with him to London, she would not go a foot
further that way--My uncle said nothing with his tongue, though his
looks were sufficiently expressive; and next morning Clinker did not
appear, so that we proceeded without further altercation to Salthill,
where we proposed to dine--There, the first person that came to the
side of the coach, and began to adjust the footboard, was no other than
Humphry Clinker--When I handed out Mrs Bramble, she eyed him with a
furious look, and passed into the house--My uncle was embarrassed, and
asked him peevishly, what had brought him hither? The fellow said, his
honour had been so good to him, that he had not the heart to part with
him; that he would follow him to the world's end, and serve him all the
days of his life, without fee or reward.

Mr Bramble did not know whether to chide or laugh at this
declaration--He foresaw much contradiction on the side of Tabby; and
on the other hand, he could not but be pleased with the gratitude of
Clinker, as well as with the simplicity of his character--'Suppose I
was inclined to take you into my service (said he) what are your
qualifications? what are you good for?' 'An please your honour (answered
this original) I can read and write, and do the business of the stable
indifferent well--I can dress a horse, and shoe him, and bleed and rowel
him; and, as for the practice of sow-gelding, I won't turn my back on
e'er a he in the county of Wilts--Then I can make hog's puddings and
hob-nails, mend kettles and tin sauce-pans.'--Here uncle burst out
a-laughing; and inquired what other accomplishments he was master of--'I
know something of single-stick, and psalmody (proceeded Clinker); I can
play upon the jew's-harp, sing Black-ey'd Susan, Arthur-o'Bradley, and
divers other songs; I can dance a Welsh jig, and Nancy Dawson; wrestle a
fall with any lad of my inches, when I'm in heart; and, under correction
I can find a hare when your honour wants a bit of game.' 'Foregad! thou
are a complete fellow (cried my uncle, still laughing) I have a good
mind to take thee into my family--Prithee, go and try if thou can'st
make peace with my sister--Thou ha'st given her much offence by shewing
her thy naked tail.'

Clinker accordingly followed us into the room, cap in hand, where,
addressing himself to Mrs Tabitha, 'May it please your ladyship's
worship (cried he) to pardon and forgive my offences, and, with God's
assistance, I shall take care that my tail shall never rise up in
judgment against me, to offend your ladyship again. Do, pray, good,
sweet, beautiful lady, take compassion on a poor sinner--God bless your
noble countenance; I am sure you are too handsome and generous to bear
malice--I will serve you on my bended knees, by night and by day, by
land and by water; and all for the love and pleasure of serving such an
excellent lady.'

This compliment and humiliation had some effect upon Tabby; but she made
no reply; and Clinker, taking silence for consent, gave his attendance
at dinner. The fellow's natural aukwardness and the flutter of his
spirits were productive of repeated blunders in the course of his
attendance--At length, he spilt part of a custard upon her right
shoulder; and, starting back, trod upon Chowder, who set up a dismal
howl--Poor Humphry was so disconcerted at this double mistake, that he
dropt the china dish, which broke into a thousand pieces; then, falling
down upon his knees, remained in that posture gaping, with a most
ludicrous aspect of distress. Mrs Bramble flew to the dog, and,
snatching him in her arms, presented him to her brother saying, 'This is
all a concerted scheme against this unfortunate animal, whose only crime
is its regard for me--Here it is, kill it at once, and then you'll be
satisfied.'

Clinker, hearing these words, and taking them in the literal
acceptation, got up in some hurry, and seizing a knife from the
side-board, cried, 'Not here, an please your ladyship--It will daub the
room--Give him to me, and I'll carry him to the ditch by the roadside'
To this proposal he received no other answer, than a hearty box on the
ear, that made him stagger to the other side of the room. 'What! (said
she to her brother) am I to be affronted by every mangy hound that you
pick up on the highway? I insist upon your sending this rascallion about
his business immediately' 'For God's sake, sister, compose yourself
(said my uncle) and consider that the poor fellow is innocent of any
intention to give you offence' 'Innocent as the babe unborn' (cried
Humphry). 'I see it plainly (exclaimed this implacable maiden), he acts
by your direction; and you are resolved to support him in his impudence
This is a bad return for all the services I have done you; for nursing
you in your sickness, managing your family, and keeping you from ruining
yourself by your own imprudence--But now you shall part with that rascal
or me, upon the spot, without farther loss of time; and the world shall
see whether you have more regard for your own flesh and blood, or for a
beggarly foundling taken from the dunghill.'

Mr Bramble's eyes began to glisten, and his teeth to chatter. 'If stated
fairly (said he, raising his voice) the question is, whether I have
spirit to shake off an intolerable yoke, by one effort of resolution,
or meanness enough to do an act of cruelty and injustice, to gratify the
rancour of a capricious woman--Heark ye, Mrs Tabitha Bramble, I will
now propose an alternative in my turn. Either discard your four-footed
favourite, or give me leave to bid you eternally adieu--For I am
determined that he and I shall live no longer under the same roof;
and to dinner with what appetite you may'--Thunderstruck at this
declaration, she sat down in a corner; and, after a pause of some
minutes, 'Sure I don't understand you, Matt! (said she)' 'And yet I
spoke in plain English' answered the 'squire, with a peremptory look.
'Sir (resumed this virago, effectually humbled), it is your prerogative
to command, and my duty to obey. I can't dispose of the dog in this
place; but if you'll allow him to go in the coach to London, I give you
my word, he shall never trouble you again.'

Her brother, entirely disarmed by this mild reply, declared, she could
ask him nothing in reason that he would refuse; adding, 'I hope, sister,
you have never found me deficient in natural affection.'

Mrs Tabitha immediately rose, and, throwing her arms about his neck,
kissed him on the cheek: he returned her embrace with great emotion.
Liddy sobbed, Win. Jenkins cackled, Chowder capered, and Clinker skipped
about, rubbing his hands for joy of this reconciliation.

Concord being thus restored, we finished our meal with comfort; and
in the evening arrived at London, without having met with any other
adventure. My aunt seems to be much mended by the hint she received from
her brother. She has been graciously pleased to remove her displeasure
from Clinker, who is now retained as a footman; and in a day or two
will make his appearance in a new suit of livery; but as he is little
acquainted with London, we have taken an occasional valet, whom I intend
hereafter to hire as my own servant. We lodge in Goldensquare, at the
house of one Mrs Notion, a decent sort of a woman, who takes great pains
to make us all easy. My uncle proposes to make a circuit of all the
remarkable scenes of this metropolis, for the entertainment of his
pupils; but as both you and I are already acquainted with most of those
he will visit, and with some others he little dreams of, I shall only
communicate what will be in some measure new to your observation.
Remember me to our Jesuitical friends, and believe me ever,

Dear knight, Yours affectionately, J. MELFORD LONDON, May 24.




To Dr LEWIS.

DEAR DOCTOR,

London is literally new to me; new in its streets, houses, and even in
its situation; as the Irishman said, 'London is now gone out of town.'
What I left open fields, producing hay and corn, I now find covered with
streets and squares, and palaces, and churches. I am credibly informed,
that in the space of seven years, eleven thousand new houses have been
built in one quarter of Westminster, exclusive of what is daily added to
other parts of this unwieldy metropolis. Pimlico and Knightsbridge are
now almost joined to Chelsea and Kensington; and if this infatuation
continues for half a century, I suppose the whole county of Middlesex
will be covered with brick.

It must be allowed, indeed, for the credit of the present age, that
London and Westminster are much better paved and lighted than they
were formerly. The new streets are spacious, regular, and airy; and
the houses generally convenient. The bridge at Blackfriars is a noble
monument of taste and public-spirit.--I wonder how they stumbled upon
a work of such magnificence and utility. But, notwithstanding these
improvements, the capital is become an overgrown monster; which, like
a dropsical head, will in time leave the body and extremities without
nourishment and support. The absurdity will appear in its full force,
when we consider that one sixth part of the natives of this whole
extensive kingdom is crowded within the bills of mortality. What
wonder that our villages are depopulated, and our farms in want of
day-labourers? The abolition of small farms is but one cause of the
decrease of population. Indeed, the incredible increase of horses and
black cattle, to answer the purposes of luxury, requires a prodigious
quantity of hay and grass, which are raised and managed without much
labour; but a number of hands will always be wanted for the different
branches of agriculture, whether the farms be large or small. The tide
of luxury has swept all the inhabitants from the open country--The
poorest squire, as well as the richest peer, must have his house in
town, and make a figure with an extraordinary number of domestics. The
plough-boys, cow-herds, and lower hinds are debauched and seduced by
the appearance and discourse of those coxcombs in livery, when they make
their summer excursions. They desert their dirt and drudgery, and swarm
up to London, in hopes of getting into service, where they can live
luxuriously and wear fine clothes, without being obliged to work; for
idleness is natural to man--Great numbers of these, being disappointed
in their expectation, become thieves and sharpers; and London being
an immense wilderness, in which there is neither watch nor ward of any
signification, nor any order or police, affords them lurking-places as
well as prey.

There are many causes that contribute to the daily increase of this
enormous mass; but they may be all resolved into the grand source of
luxury and corruption--About five and twenty years ago, very few, even
of the most opulent citizens of London, kept any equipage, or even any
servants in livery. Their tables produced nothing but plain boiled and
roasted, with a bottle of port and a tankard of beer. At present, every
trader in any degree of credit, every broker and attorney, maintains a
couple of footmen, a coachman, and postilion. He has his town-house,
and his country-house, his coach, and his post-chaise. His wife and
daughters appear in the richest stuffs, bespangled with diamonds. They
frequent the court, the opera, the theatre, and the masquerade. They
hold assemblies at their own houses: they make sumptuous entertainments,
and treat with the richest wines of Bordeaux, Burgundy, and Champagne.
The substantial tradesman, who wont to pass his evenings at the
ale-house for fourpence half-penny, now spends three shillings at the
tavern, while his wife keeps card-tables at home; she must likewise have
fine clothes, her chaise, or pad, with country lodgings, and go three
times a week to public diversions. Every clerk, apprentice, and even
waiter of tavern or coffeehouse, maintains a gelding by himself, or
in partnership, and assumes the air and apparel of a petit maitre--The
gayest places of public entertainment are filled with fashionable
figures; which, upon inquiry, will be found to be journeymen taylors,
serving-men, and abigails, disguised like their betters.

In short, there is no distinction or subordination left--The different
departments of life are jumbled together--The hod-carrier, the low
mechanic, the tapster, the publican, the shopkeeper, the pettifogger,
the citizen, and courtier, all tread upon the kibes of one another:
actuated by the demons of profligacy and licentiousness, they are
seen every where rambling, riding, rolling, rushing, justling, mixing,
bouncing, cracking, and crashing in one vile ferment of stupidity
and corruption--All is tumult and hurry; one would imagine they were
impelled by some disorder of the brain, that will not suffer them to
be at rest. The foot-passengers run along as if they were pursued by
bailiffs. The porters and chairmen trot with their burthens. People, who
keep their own equipages, drive through the streets at full speed. Even
citizens, physicians, and apothecaries, glide in their chariots like
lightening. The hackney-coachmen make their horses smoke, and the
pavement shakes under them; and I have actually seen a waggon pass
through Piccadilly at the hand-gallop. In a word, the whole nation seems
to be running out of their wits.

The diversions of the times are not ill suited to the genius of this
incongruous monster, called the public. Give it noise, confusion, glare,
and glitter; it has no idea of elegance and propriety--What are the
amusements of Ranelagh? One half of the company are following at the
other's tails, in an eternal circle; like so many blind asses in an
olive-mill, where they can neither discourse, distinguish, nor be
distinguished; while the other half are drinking hot water, under the
denomination of tea, till nine or ten o'clock at night, to keep them
awake for the rest of the evening. As for the orchestra, the vocal music
especially, it is well for the performers that they cannot be heard
distinctly. Vauxhall is a composition of baubles, overcharged with
paltry ornaments, ill conceived, and poorly executed; without any unity
of design, or propriety of disposition. It is an unnatural assembly of
objects, fantastically illuminated in broken masses; seemingly contrived
to dazzle the eyes and divert the imagination of the vulgar--Here a
wooden lion, there a stone statue; in one place, a range of things like
coffeehouse boxes, covered a-top; in another, a parcel of ale-house
benches; in a third, a puppet-show representation of a tin cascade; in
a fourth, a gloomy cave of a circular form, like a sepulchral vault half
lighted; in a fifth, a scanty flip of grass-plat, that would not afford
pasture sufficient for an ass's colt. The walks, which nature seems to
have intended for solitude, shade, and silence, are filled with crowds
of noisy people, sucking up the nocturnal rheums of an aguish climate;
and through these gay scenes, a few lamps glimmer like so many farthing
candles.

When I see a number of well dressed people, of both sexes, sitting
on the covered benches, exposed to the eyes of the mob; and, which is
worse, to the cold, raw, night-air, devouring sliced beef, and swilling
port, and punch, and cyder, I can't help compassionating their temerity;
white I despise their want of taste and decorum; but, when they course
along those damp and gloomy walks, or crowd together upon the wet
gravel, without any other cover than the cope of Heaven, listening to
a song, which one half of them cannot possibly hear, how can I help
supposing they are actually possessed by a spirit, more absurd and
pernicious than any thing we meet with in the precincts of Bedlam? In
all probability, the proprietors of this, and other public gardens of
inferior note, in the skirts of the metropolis, are, in some shape,
connected with the faculty of physic, and the company of undertakers;
for, considering that eagerness in the pursuit of what is called
pleasure, which now predominates through every rank and denomination
of life, I am persuaded that more gouts, rheumatisms, catarrhs, and
consumptions are caught in these nocturnal pastimes, sub dio, than from
all the risques and accidents to which a life of toil and danger is
exposed.

These, and other observations, which I have made in this excursion, will
shorten my stay at London, and send me back with a double relish to my
solitude and mountains; but I shall return by a different route from
that which brought me to town. I have seen some old friends, who
constantly resided in this virtuous metropolis, but they are so
changed in manners and disposition, that we hardly know or care for one
another--In our journey from Bath, my sister Tabby provoked me into a
transport of passion; during which, like a man who has drank himself
pot-valiant, I talked to her in such a stile of authority and
resolution, as produced a most blessed effect. She and her dog have been
remarkably quiet and orderly ever since this expostulation. How long
this agreeable calm will last, Heaven above knows--I flatter myself, the
exercise of travelling has been of service to my health; a circumstance
which encourages me to-proceed in my projected expedition to the North.
But I must, in the mean time, for the benefit and amusement of my
pupils, explore the depths of this chaos; this misshapen and monstrous
capital, without head or tail, members or proportion.

Thomas was so insolent to my sister on the road, that I was obliged to
turn him off abruptly, betwixt Chippenham and Marlborough, where our
coach was overturned. The fellow was always sullen and selfish; but,
if he should return to the country, you may give him a character for
honesty and sobriety; and, provided he behaves with proper respect to
the family, let him have a couple of guineas in the name of

Yours always, MATT. BRAMBLE LONDON, May 20.




To Miss LAETITIA WILLIS, at Gloucester.

MY DEAR LETTY,

Inexpressible was the pleasure I received from yours of the 25th, which
was last night put into my hands by Mrs Brentford, the milliner, from
Gloucester--I rejoice to hear that my worthy governess is in good
health, and, still more, that she no longer retains any displeasure
towards her poor Liddy. I am sorry you have lost the society of the
agreeable Miss Vaughn; but, I hope you won't have cause much longer to
regret the departure of your school companions, as I make no doubt but
your parents will, in a little time, bring you into the world, where you
are so well qualified to make a distinguished figure. When that is
the case, I flatter myself you and I shall meet again, and be happy
together; and even improve the friendship which we contracted in our
tender years. This at least I can promise--It shall not be for the want
of my utmost endeavours, if our intimacy does not continue for life.

About five days ago we arrived in London, after an easy journey from
Bath; during which, however, we were overturned, and met with some other
little incidents, which, had like to have occasioned a misunderstanding
betwixt my uncle and aunt; but now, thank God, they are happily
reconciled: we live in harmony together, and every day make parties
to see the wonders of this vast metropolis, which, however, I cannot
pretend to describe; for I have not as yet seen one hundredth part of
its curiosities, and I am quite in a maze of admiration.

The cities of London and Westminster are spread out into an incredible
extent. The streets, squares, rows, lanes, and alleys, are innumerable.
Palaces, public buildings, and churches rise in every quarter;
and, among these last, St Paul's appears with the most astonishing
pre-eminence. They say it is not so large as, St Peter's at Rome; but,
for my own part, I can have no idea of any earthly temple more grand and
magnificent.

But even these superb objects are not so striking as the crowds of
people that swarm in the streets. I at first imagined that some
great assembly was just dismissed, and wanted to stand aside till the
multitude should pass; but this human tide continues to flow, without
interruption or abatement, from morn till night. Then there is such
an infinity of gay equipages, coaches, chariots, chaises, and other
carriages, continually rolling and shifting before your eyes, that
one's head grows giddy looking at them; and the imagination is quite
confounded with splendour and variety. Nor is the prospect by water
less grand and astonishing than that by land: you see three stupendous
bridges, joining the opposite banks of a broad, deep, and rapid river;
so vast, so stately, so elegant, that they seem to be the work of the
giants; betwixt them, the whole surface of the Thames is covered with
small vessels, barges, boats, and wherries, passing to and fro; and
below the three bridges, such a prodigious forest of masts, for miles
together, that you would think all the ships in the universe were here
assembled. All that you read of wealth and grandeur in the Arabian
Nights' Entertainment, and the Persian Tales, concerning Bagdad,
Diarbekir, Damascus, Ispahan, and Samarkand, is here realized.

Ranelagh looks like the inchanted palace of a genie, adorned with
the most exquisite performances of painting, carving, and gilding,
enlightened with a thousand golden lamps, that emulate the noon-day
sun; crowded with the great, the rich, the gay, the happy, and the fair;
glittering with cloth of gold and silver, lace, embroidery, and precious
stones. While these exulting sons and daughters of felicity tread this
round of pleasure, or regale in different parties, and separate lodges,
with fine imperial tea and other delicious refreshments, their ears are
entertained with the most ravishing delights of music, both instrumental
and vocal. There I heard the famous Tenducci, a thing from Italy--It
looks for all the world like a man, though they say it is not. The
voice, to be sure, is neither man's nor woman's; but it is more
melodious than either; and it warbled so divinely, that, while I
listened, I really thought myself in paradise.

At nine o'clock, in a charming moonlight evening, we embarked at
Ranelagh for Vauxhall, in a wherry so light and slender that we looked
like so many fairies sailing in a nutshell. My uncle, being apprehensive
of catching cold upon the water, went round in the coach, and my aunt
would have accompanied him, but he would not suffer me to go by water if
she went by land; and therefore she favoured us with her company, as she
perceived I had a curiosity to make this agreeable voyage--After all,
the vessel was sufficiently loaded; for, besides the waterman, there
was my brother Jery, and a friend of his, one Mr Barton, a country
gentleman, of a good fortune, who had dined at our house--The pleasure
of this little excursion was, however, damped, by my being sadly
frighted at our landing; where there was a terrible confusion of
wherries and a crowd of people bawling, and swearing, and quarrelling,
nay, a parcel of ugly-looking fellows came running into the water, and
laid hold of our boat with great violence, to pull it a-shore; nor would
they quit their hold till my brother struck one of them over the head
with his cane. But this flutter was fully recompensed by the pleasures
of Vauxhall; which I no sooner entered, than I was dazzled and
confounded with the variety of beauties that rushed all at once upon my
eye. Image to yourself, my dear Letty, a spacious garden, part laid out
in delightful walks, bounded with high hedges and trees, and paved with
gravel; part exhibiting a wonderful assemblage of the most picturesque
and striking objects' pavilions, lodges, groves, grottoes, lawns,
temples and cascades; porticoes, colonades, and rotundos; adorned with
pillars, statues, and painting: the whole illuminated with an infinite
number of lamps, disposed in different figures of suns, stars, and
constellations; the place crowded with the gayest company, ranging
through those blissful shades, or supping in different lodges on cold
collations, enlivened with mirth, freedom, and good humour, and animated
by an excellent band of music. Among the vocal performers I had the
happiness to hear the celebrated Mrs--, whose voice was loud and shrill,
that it made my head ake through excess of pleasure.

In about half an hour after we arrived we were joined by my uncle, who
did not seem to relish the place. People of experience and infirmity, my
dear Letty, see with very different eyes from those that such as you and
I make use of--Our evening's entertainment was interrupted by an unlucky
accident. In one of the remotest walks we were surprised with a sudden
shower, that set the whole company a-running, and drove us in heaps,
one upon another, into the rotunda; where my uncle, finding himself wet,
began to be very peevish and urgent to be gone. My brother went to look
for the coach, and found it with much difficulty; but as it could
not hold us all, Mr Barton stayed behind. It was some time before
the carriage could be brought up to the gate, in the confusion,
notwithstanding the utmost endeavours of our new footman, Humphry
Clinker, who lost his scratch periwig, and got a broken head in the
scuffle. The moment we were seated, my aunt pulled off my uncle's shoes,
and carefully wrapped his poor feet in her capuchin; then she gave him
a mouth-ful of cordial, which she always keeps in her pocket, and his
clothes were shifted as soon as we arrived at lodgings; so that, blessed
be God, he escaped a severe cold, of which he was in great terror.

As for Mr Barton, I must tell you in confidence, he was a little
particular; but, perhaps, I mistake his complaisance; and I wish I may,
for his sake--You know the condition of my poor heart: which, in spite
of hard usage--And yet I ought not to complain: nor will I, till farther
information.

Besides Ranelagh and Vauxhall, I have been at Mrs Cornelys' assembly,
which, for the rooms, the company, the dresses, and decorations,
surpasses all description; but as I have no great turn for card playing,
I have not yet entered thoroughly into the spirit of the place: indeed I
am still such a country hoyden, that I could hardly find patience to be
put in a condition to appear, yet, as I was not above six hours under
the hands of the hair-dresser, who stuffed my head with as much black
wool as would have made a quilted petticoat; and, after all, it was the
smallest head in the assembly, except my aunt's--She, to be sure, was
so particular with her rumpt gown and petticoat, her scanty curls, her
lappethead, deep triple ruffles, and high stays, that every body looked
at her with surprise: some whispered, and some tittered; and lady
Griskin, by whom we were introduced, flatly told her, she was twenty
good years behind the fashion.

Lady Griskin is a person of fashion, to whom we have the honour to be
related. She keeps a small rout at her own house, never exceeding ten
or a dozen card-tables, but these are frequented by the best company in
town--She has been so obliging as to introduce my aunt and me to some of
her particular friends of quality, who treat us with the most familiar
good-humour: we have once dined with her, and she takes the trouble
to direct us in all our motions. I am so happy as to have gained her
goodwill to such a degree, that she sometimes adjusts my cap with her
own hands; and she has given me a kind invitation to stay with her all
the winter. This, however, has been cruelly declined by my uncle who
seems to be (I know not how) prejudiced against the good lady; for,
whenever my aunt happens to speak in her commendation, I observe that he
makes wry faces, though he says nothing--Perhaps, indeed, these grimaces
may be the effect of pain arising from the gout and rheumatism, with
which he is sadly distressed--To me, however, he is always good-natured
and generous, even beyond my wish. Since we came hither, he has made
me a present of a suit of clothes, with trimmings and laces, which cost
more money than I shall mention; and Jery, at his desire, has given me
my mother's diamond crops, which are ordered to be set a-new; so that it
won't be his fault if I do not glitter among the stars of the fourth or
fifth magnitude. I wish my weak head may not grow giddy in the midst
of all this gallantry and dissipation; though, as yet, I can safely
declare, I could gladly give up all these tumultuous pleasures, for
country solitude, and a happy retreat with those we love; among whom, my
dear Willis will always possess the first place in the breast of her

Ever affectionate, LYDIA MELFORD LONDON, May 31.




To Sir WATKIN PHILLIPS, of Jesus college, Oxon.

DEAR PHILLIPS,

I send you this letter, franked by our old friend Barton; who is as much
altered as it was possible for a man of his kidney to be. Instead of
the careless, indolent sloven we knew at Oxford, I found him a busy
talkative politician; a petit-maitre in his dress, and a ceremonious
courtier in his manners. He has not gall enough in his constitution
to be enflamed with the rancour of party, so as to deal in scurrilous
invectives; but, since he obtained a place, he is become a warm partizan
of the ministry, and sees every thing through such an exaggerating
medium, as to me, who am happily of no party, is altogether
incomprehensible--Without all doubt, the fumes of faction not only
disturb the faculty of reason, but also pervert the organs of sense; and
I would lay a hundred guineas to ten, that if Barton on one side, and
the most conscientious patriot in the opposition on the other, were to
draw, upon honour, the picture of the k[ing] or m[inisters], you and I,
who are still uninfected, and unbiased, would find both painters equally
distant from the truth. One thing, however, must be allowed for the
honour of Barton, he never breaks out into illiberal abuse, far less
endeavours, by infamous calumnies, to blast the moral character of any
individual on the other side.

Ever since we came hither, he has been remarkably assiduous in his
attention to our family; an attention, which, in a man of his indolence
and avocations, I should have thought altogether odd, and even
unnatural, had not I perceived that my sister Liddy had made some
impression upon his heart. I cannot say that I have any objection to
his trying his fortune in this pursuit: if an opulent estate and a great
flock of good-nature are sufficient qualifications in a husband, to
render the marriage-state happy for life, she may be happy with Barton;
but, I imagine, there is something else required to engage and secure
the affection of a woman of sense and delicacy: something which nature
has denied our friend--Liddy seems to be of the same opinion. When
he addresses himself to her in discourse, she seems to listen with
reluctance, and industriously avoids all particular communication; but
in proportion to her coyness, our aunt is coming. Mrs Tabitha goes more
than half way to meet his advances; she mistakes, or affects to mistake,
the meaning of his courtesy, which is rather formal and fulsome; she
returns his compliments with hyperbolical interest, she persecutes
him with her civilities at table, she appeals to him for ever in
conversation, she sighs, and flirts, and ogles, and by her hideous
affectation and impertinence, drives the poor courtier to the very
extremity of his complaisance; in short, she seems to have undertaken
the siege of Barton's heart, and carries on her approaches in such a
desperate manner, that I don't know whether he will not be obliged to
capitulate. In the mean time, his aversion to this inamorata struggling
with his acquired affability, and his natural fear of giving offence,
throws him into a kind of distress which is extremely ridiculous.

Two days ago, he persuaded my uncle and me to accompany him to St
James's, where he undertook to make us acquainted with the persons
of all the great men in the kingdom; and, indeed, there was a great
assemblage of distinguished characters, for it was a high festival at
court. Our conductor performed his promise with great punctuality.
He pointed out almost every individual of both sexes, and generally
introduced them to our notice, with a flourish of panegyrick--Seeing the
king approach, 'There comes (said he) the most amiable sovereign
that ever swayed the sceptre of England: the delicioe humani generis;
Augustus, in patronizing merit; Titus Vespasian in generosity; Trajan
in beneficence; and Marcus Aurelius in philosophy.' 'A very honest kind
hearted gentleman (added my uncle) he's too good for the times. A king
of England should have a spice of the devil in his composition.' Barton,
then turning to the duke of C[umberland], proceeded,--'You know the
duke, that illustrious hero, who trode rebellion under his feet, and
secured us in possession of every thing we ought to hold dear, as
English men and Christians. Mark what an eye, how penetrating, yet
pacific! what dignity in his mien! what humanity in his aspect--Even
malice must own, that he is one of the greatest officers in
Christendom.' 'I think he is (said Mr Bramble) but who are these young
gentlemen that stand beside him?' 'Those! (cried our friend) those are
his royal nephews; the princes of the blood. Sweet young princes! the
sacred pledges of the Protestant line; so spirited, so sensible,
so princely'--'Yes; very sensible! very spirited! (said my uncle,
interrupting him) but see the queen! ha, there's the queen!--There's the
queen! let me see--Let me see--Where are my glasses? ha! there's meaning
in that eye--There's sentiment--There's expression--Well, Mr Barton,
what figure do you call next?' The next person he pointed out, was the
favourite yearl; who stood solitary by one of the windows--'Behold
yon northern star (said he) shorn of his beams'--'What! the Caledonian
luminary, that lately blazed so bright in our hemisphere! methinks, at
present, it glimmers through a fog; like Saturn without his ring, bleak,
and dim, and distant--Ha, there's the other great phenomenon, the grand
pensionary, that weathercock of patriotism that veers about in every
point of the political compass, and still feels the wind of popularity
in his tail. He too, like a portentous comet, has risen again above the
court-horizon; but how long he will continue to ascend, it is not easy
to foretell, considering his great eccentricity--Who are those two
satellites that attend his motions?' When Barton told him their names,
'To their characters (said Mr Bramble) I am no stranger. One of them,
without a drop of red blood in his veins, has a cold intoxicating vapour
in his head; and rancour enough in his heart to inoculate and affect
a whole nation. The other is (I hear) intended for a share in the
ad[ministratio]n, and the pensionary vouches for his being duly
qualified--The only instance I ever heard of his sagacity, was his
deserting his former patron, when he found him declining in power, and
in disgrace with the people. Without principle, talent, or intelligence,
he is ungracious as a hog, greedy as a vulture, and thievish as a
jackdaw; but, it must be owned, he is no hypocrite. He pretends to no
virtue, and takes no pains to disguise his character--His ministry
will be attended with one advantage, no man will be disappointed by his
breach of promise, as no mortal ever trusted to his word. I wonder how
lord--first discovered this happy genius, and for what purpose lord--has
now adopted him: but one would think, that as amber has a power to
attract dirt, and straws, and chaff, a minister is endued with the same
kind of faculty, to lick up every knave and blockhead in his way'--His
eulogium was interrupted by the arrival of the old duke of N--; who,
squeezing into the circle with a busy face of importance, thrust his
head into every countenance, as if he had been in search of somebody, to
whom he wanted to impart something of great consequence--My uncle, who
had been formerly known to him, bowed as he passed; and the duke seeing
himself saluted so respectfully by a well-dressed person, was not slow
in returning the courtesy--He even came up, and, taking him cordially by
the hand, 'My dear friend, Mr A-- (said he) I am rejoiced to see you--
How long have you been come from abroad?--How did you leave our good
friends the Dutch? The king of Prussia don't think of another war,
ah?--He's a great king! a great conqueror! a very great conqueror! Your
Alexanders and Hannibals were nothing, at all to him, sir--Corporals!
drummers! dross! mere trash--Damned trash, heh?'--His grace being by
this time out of breath, my uncle took the opportunity to tell him he
had not been out of England, that his name was Bramble, and that he had
the honour to sit in the last parliament but one of the late king, as
representative for the borough of Dymkymraig. 'Odso! (cried the duke) I
remember you perfectly well, my dear Mr Bramble--You was always a
good and loyal subject--a stanch friend to administration--I made your
brother an Irish bishop'--'Pardon me, my lord (said the squire) I once
had a brother, but he was a captain in the army'--'Ha! (said his
grace) he was so--He was, indeed! But who was the Bishop then! Bishop
Blackberry--Sure it was bishop Blackberry. Perhaps some relation of
yours'--'Very likely, my lord (replied my uncle); the Blackberry is the
fruit of the Bramble--But, I believe, the bishop is not a berry of our
bush'--'No more he is--No more he is, ha, ha, ha! (exclaimed the duke)
there you gave me a scratch, good Mr Bramble, ha, ha, ha!--Well,
I shall be glad to see you at Lincoln's inn-fields--You know the
way--Times are altered. Though I have lost the power, I retain the
inclination--Your very humble servant, good Mr Blackberry'--So saying,
he shoved to another corner of the room. 'What a fine old gentleman!
(cried Mr Barton) what spirits! what a memory! He never forgets an old
friend.' 'He does me too much honour (observed our squire) to rank me
among the number--Whilst I sat in parliament, I never voted with the
ministry but three times, when my conscience told me they were in the
right: however, if he still keeps levee, I will carry my nephew thither,
that he may see, and learn to avoid the scene; for, I think, an English
gentleman never appears to such disadvantage, as at the levee of a
minister--Of his grace I shall say nothing at present, but that for
thirty years he was the constant and common butt of ridicule and
execration. He was generally laughed at as an ape in politics, whose
office and influence served only to render his folly the more notorious;
and the opposition cursed him, as the indefatigable drudge of a
first-mover, who was justly stiled and stigmatized as the father of
corruption: but this ridiculous ape, this venal drudge, no sooner lost
the places he was so ill qualified to fill, and unfurled the banners of
faction, than he was metamorphosed into a pattern of public virtue; the
very people who reviled him before, now extolled him to the skies, as a
wise, experienced statesman, chief pillar of the Protestant succession,
and corner stone of English liberty. I should be glad to know how Mr
Barton reconciles these contradictions, without obliging us to resign
all title to the privilege of common sense.' 'My dear sir (answered
Barton) I don't pretend to justify the extravagations of the multitude;
who, I suppose, were as wild in their former censure, as in the present
praise: but I shall be very glad to attend you on Thursday next to his
grace's levee; where, I'm afraid, we shall not be crowded with company;
for, you know, there's a wide difference between his present office of
president of the council, and his former post of first lord commissioner
of the treasury.'

This communicative friend having announced all the remarkable characters
of both sexes, that appeared at court, we resolved to adjourn, and
retired. At the foot of the stair-case, there was a crowd of lacqueys
and chairmen, and in the midst of them stood Humphry Clinker, exalted
upon a stool, with his hat in one hand, and a paper in the other, in
the act of holding forth to the people--Before we could inquire into the
meaning of this exhibition, he perceived his master, thrust the paper
into his pocket, descended from his elevation, bolted through the crowd,
and brought up the carriage to the gate.

My uncle said nothing till we were seated, when, after having looked at
me earnestly for some time, he burst out a-laughing, and asked if I knew
upon what subject Clinker was holding forth to the mob--'If (said he)
the fellow is turned mountebank, I must turn him out of my service,
otherwise he'll make Merry Andrews of us all'--I observed, that, in
all probability, he had studied medicine under his master, who was a
farrier.

At dinner, the squire asked him, if he had ever practised physic? 'Yes,
and please your honour (said he) among brute beasts; but I never meddle
with rational creatures.' 'I know not whether you rank in that class the
audience you was haranguing in the court at St. James's, but I should be
glad to know what kind of powders you was distributing; and whether you
had a good sale'--'Sale, sir! (cried Clinker) I hope I shall never be
base enough to sell for gold and silver, what freely comes of God's
grace. I distributed nothing, an like your honour, but a word of
advice to my fellows in servitude and sin.' 'Advice! concerning what?'
'Concerning profane swearing, an please your honour; so horrid and
shocking, that it made my hair stand on end.' 'Nay, if thou can'st cure
them Of that disease, I shall think thee a wonderful doctor indeed' 'Why
not cure them, my good master? the hearts of those poor people are not
so stubborn as your honour seems to think--Make them first sensible
that you have nothing in view but their good, then they will listen with
patience, and easily be convinced of the sin and folly of a practice
that affords neither profit nor pleasure--At this remark, our uncle
changed colour, and looked round the company, conscious that his own
withers were not altogether unwrung. 'But, Clinker (said he) if you
should have eloquence enough to persuade the vulgar to resign those
tropes and figures of rhetoric, there will be little or nothing left to
distinguish their conversation from that of their betters.' 'But then
your honour knows, their conversation will be void of offence; and, at
the day of judgment, there will be no distinction of persons.'

Humphry going down stairs to fetch up a bottle of wine, my uncle
congratulated his sister upon having such a reformer in the family; when
Mrs Tabitha declared, he was a sober civilized fellow; very respectful,
and very industrious; and, she believed, a good Christian into
the bargain. One would think, Clinker must really have some very
extraordinary talent, to ingratiate himself in this manner with a
virago of her character, so fortified against him with prejudice and
resentment; but the truth is, since the adventure of Salt-hill, Mrs
Tabby seems to be entirely changed. She has left off scolding the
servants, an exercise which was grown habitual, and even seemed
necessary to her constitution; and is become so indifferent to Chowder,
as to part with him in a present to lady Griskin, who proposes to bring
the breed of him into fashion. Her ladyship is the widow of Sir Timothy
Griskin, a distant relation of our family. She enjoys a jointure of five
hundred pounds a-year, and makes shift to spend three times that sum.
Her character before marriage was a little equivocal; but at present she
lives in the bon ton, keeps card-tables, gives private suppers to select
friends, and is visited by persons of the first fashion--She has been
remarkably civil to us all, and cultivates my uncle with the most
particular regard; but the more she strokes him, the more his bristles
seem to rise--To her compliments he makes very laconic and dry
returns--T'other day she sent us a pottle of fine strawberries, which
he did not receive without signs of disgust, muttering from the Aeneid,
timeo Danaos et Dona ferentes. She has twice called for Liddy, of a
forenoon, to take an airing in the coach; but Mrs Tabby was always so
alert (I suppose by his direction) that she never could have the niece
without her aunt's company. I have endeavoured to sound Square-toes on
this subject; but he carefully avoids all explanation.

I have now, dear Phillips, filled a whole sheet, and if you have read it
to an end, I dare say, you are as tired as

Your humble servant, J. MELFORD LONDON, June 2.




To Dr LEWIS.

Yes, Doctor, I have seen the British Museum; which is a noble
collection, and even stupendous, if we consider it was made by a private
man, a physician, who was obliged to make his own for tune at the same
time: but great as the collection is, it would appear more striking if
it was arranged in one spacious saloon, instead of being divided into
different apartments, which it does not entirely fill--I could wish the
series of medals was connected, and the whole of the animal, vegetable,
and mineral kingdoms completed, by adding to each, at the public
expence, those articles that are wanting. It would likewise be a great
improvement, with respect to the library, if the deficiencies were made
up, by purchasing all the books of character that are not to be found
already in the collection--They might be classed in centuries, according
to the dates of their publication, and catalogues printed of them and
the manuscripts, for the information of those that want to consult, or
compile from such authorities. I could also wish, for the honour of the
nation, that there was a complete apparatus for a course of mathematics,
mechanics, and experimental philosophy; and a good salary settled upon
an able professor, who should give regular lectures on these subjects.

But this is all idle speculation, which will never be reduced to
practice--Considering the temper of the times, it is a wonder to see any
institution whatsoever established for the benefit of the Public. The
spirit of party is risen to a kind of phrenzy, unknown to former ages,
or rather degenerated to a total extinction of honesty and candour--You
know I have observed, for some time, that the public papers are become
the infamous vehicles of the most cruel and perfidious defamation: every
rancorous knave every desperate incendiary, that can afford to spend
half a crown or three shillings, may skulk behind the press of a
newsmonger, and have a stab at the first character in the kingdom,
without running the least hazard of detection or punishment.

I have made acquaintance with a Mr Barton, whom Jery knew at Oxford;
a good sort of a man, though most ridiculously warped in his political
principles; but his partiality is the less offensive, as it never
appears in the stile of scurrility and abuse. He is a member of
parliament, and a retainer to the court; and his whole conversation
turns upon the virtues and perfections of the ministers, who are his
patrons. T'other day, when he was bedaubing one of those worthies,
with the most fulsome praise, I told him I had seen the same nobleman
characterised very differently, in one of the daily-papers; indeed, so
stigmatized, that if one half of what was said of him was true, he
must be not only unfit to rule, but even unfit to live: that those
impeachments had been repeated again and again, with the addition
of fresh matter; and that as he had taken no steps towards his own
vindication, I began to think there was some foundation for the charge.
'And pray, Sir (said Mr Barton), what steps would you have him take?
Suppose he should prosecute the publisher, who screens the anonymous
accuser, and bring him to the pillory for a libel; this is so far from
being counted a punishment, in terrorem, that it will probably make his
fortune. The multitude immediately take him into their protection, as a
martyr to the cause of defamation, which they have always espoused. They
pay his fine, they contribute to the increase of his stock, his shop is
crowded with customers, and the sale of his paper rises in proportion
to the scandal it contains. All this time the prosecutor is inveighed
against as a tyrant and oppressor, for having chosen to proceed by
the way of information, which is deemed a grievance; but if he lays an
action for damages, he must prove the damage, and I leave you to judge,
whether a gentleman's character may not be brought into contempt, and
all his views in life blasted by calumny, without his being able to
specify the particulars of the damage he has sustained.

'This spirit of defamation is a kind of heresy, that thrives under
persecution. The liberty of the press is a term of great efficacy; and
like that of the Protestant religion, has often served the purposes of
sedition--A minister, therefore, must arm himself with patience, and
bear those attacks without repining--Whatever mischief they may do in
other respects, they certainly contribute, in one particular, to the
advantages of government; for those defamatory articles have multiplied
papers in such a manner, and augmented their sale to such a degree, that
the duty upon stamps and advertisements has made a very considerable
addition to the revenue.' Certain it is, a gentleman's honour is a very
delicate subject to be handled by a jury, composed of men, who cannot
be supposed remarkable either for sentiment or impartiality--In such a
case, indeed, the defendant is tried, not only by his peers, but also
by his party; and I really think, that of all patriots, he is the most
resolute who exposes himself to such detraction, for the sake of his
country--If, from the ignorance or partiality of juries, a gentleman can
have no redress from law, for being defamed in a pamphlet or newspaper,
I know but one other method of proceeding against the publisher, which
is attended with some risque, but has been practised successfully, more
than once, in my remembrance--A regiment of horse was represented, in
one of the newspapers, as having misbehaved at Dettingen; a captain
of that regiment broke the publisher's bones, telling him, at the same
time, if he went to law, he should certainly have the like salutation
from every officer of the corps. Governor--took the same satisfaction on
the ribs of an author, who traduced him by name in a periodical paper--I
know a low fellow of the same class, who, being turned out of Venice for
his impudence and scurrility, retired to Lugano, a town of the Grisons
(a free people, God wot) where he found a printing press, from whence he
squirted his filth at some respectable characters in the republic, which
he had been obliged to abandon. Some of these, finding him out of the
reach of legal chastisement, employed certain useful instruments, such
as may be found in all countries, to give him the bastinado; which,
being repeated more than once, effectually stopt the current of his
abuse.

As for the liberty of the press, like every other privilege, it must be
restrained within certain bounds; for if it is carried to a branch of
law, religion, and charity, it becomes one of the greatest evils that
ever annoyed the community. If the lowest ruffian may stab your good
name with impunity in England, will you be so uncandid as to exclaim
against Italy for the practice of common assassination? To what purpose
is our property secured, if our moral character is left defenceless?
People thus baited, grow desperate; and the despair of being able to
preserve one's character, untainted by such vermin, produces a total
neglect of fame; so that one of the chief incitements to the practice of
virtue is effectually destroyed.

Mr Barton's last consideration, respecting the stamp-duty, is equally
wise and laudable with another maxim which has been long adopted by our
financiers, namely, to connive at drunkenness, riot, and dissipation,
because they inhance the receipt of the excise; not reflecting, that in
providing this temporary convenience, they are destroying the morals,
health, and industry of the people--Notwithstanding my contempt for
those who flatter a minister, I think there is something still more
despicable in flattering a mob. When I see a man of birth, education,
and fortune, put himself on a level with the dregs of the people, mingle
with low mechanics, feed with them at the same board, and drink with
them in the same cup, flatter their prejudices, harangue in praise of
their virtues, expose themselves to the belchings of their beer, the
fumes of their tobacco, the grossness of their familiarity, and the
impertinence of their conversation, I cannot help despising him, as
a man guilty of the vilest prostitution, in order to effect a purpose
equally selfish and illiberal.

I should renounce politics the more willingly, if I could find other
topics of conversation discussed with more modesty and candour; but the
daemon of party seems to have usurped every department of life. Even
the world of literature and taste is divided into the most virulent
factions, which revile, decry, and traduce the works of one another.
Yesterday, I went to return an afternoon's visit to a gentleman of my
acquaintance, at whose house I found one of the authors of the present
age, who has written with some success--As I had read one or two of his
performances, which gave me pleasure, I was glad of this opportunity
to know his person; but his discourse and deportment destroyed all the
impressions which his writings had made in his favour. He took upon him
to decide dogmatically upon every subject, without deigning to shew the
least cause for his differing from the general opinions of mankind,
as if it had been our duty to acquiesce in the ipse dixit of this new
Pythagoras. He rejudged the characters of all the principal authors, who
had died within a century of the present time; and, in this revision,
paid no sort of regard to the reputation they had acquired--Milton was
harsh and prosaic; Dryden, languid and verbose; Butler and Swift
without humour; Congreve, without wit; and Pope destitute of any sort of
poetical merit--As for his contemporaries, he could not bear to hear
one of them mentioned with any degree of applause--They were all dunces,
pedants, plagiaries, quacks, and impostors; and you could not name a
single performance, but what was tame, stupid, and insipid. It must be
owned, that this writer had nothing to charge his conscience with, on
the side of flattery; for I understand, he was never known to praise one
line that was written, even by those with whom he lived on terms of good
fellowship. This arrogance and presumption, in depreciating authors, for
whose reputation the company may be interested, is such an insult upon
the understanding, as I could not bear without wincing.

I desired to know his reasons for decrying some works, which had
afforded me uncommon pleasure; and, as demonstration did not seem to be
his talent, I dissented from his opinion with great freedom. Having been
spoiled by the deference and humility of his hearers, he did not bear
contradiction with much temper; and the dispute might have grown warm,
had it not been interrupted by the entrance of a rival bard, at whose
appearance he always quits the place--They are of different cabals, and
have been at open war these twenty years--If the other was dogmatical,
this genius was declamatory: he did not discourse, but harangue; and his
orations were equally tedious and turgid. He too pronounces ex cathedra
upon the characters of his contemporaries; and though he scruples not to
deal out praise, even lavishly, to the lowest reptile in Grubstreet who
will either flatter him in private, or mount the public rostrum as his
panegyrist, he damns all the other writers of the age, with the utmost
insolence and rancour--One is a blunderbuss, as being a native of
Ireland; another, a half-starved louse of literature, from the banks
of the Tweed; a third, an ass, because he enjoys a pension from the
government; a fourth, the very angel of dulness, because he succeeded in
a species of writing in which this Aristarchus had failed; a fifth, who
presumed to make strictures upon one of his performances, he holds as
a bug in criticism, whose stench is more offensive than his sting--In
short, except himself and his myrmidons, there is not a man of genius
or learning in the three kingdoms. As for the success of those, who have
written without the pale of this confederacy, he imputes it entirely to
want of taste in the public; not considering, that to the approbation of
that very tasteless public, he himself owes all the consequence he has
in life.

Those originals are not fit for conversation. If they would maintain the
advantage they have gained by their writing, they should never appear
but upon paper--For my part, I am shocked to find a man have sublime
ideas in his head, and nothing but illiberal sentiments in his
heart--The human soul will be generally found most defective in the
article of candour--I am inclined to think, no mind was ever wholly
exempt from envy; which, perhaps, may have been implanted, as an
instinct essential to our nature. I am afraid we sometimes palliate
this vice, under the spacious name of emulation. I have known a person
remarkably generous, humane, moderate, and apparently self-denying,
who could not hear even a friend commended, without betraying marks of
uneasiness; as if that commendation had implied an odious comparison
to his prejudice, and every wreath of praise added to the other's
character, was a garland plucked from his own temples. This is a
malignant species of jealousy, of which I stand acquitted in my own
conscience.

Whether it is a vice, or an infirmity, I leave you to inquire.

There is another point, which I would much rather see determined;
whether the world was always as contemptible, as it appears to me at
present?--If the morals of mankind have not contracted an extraordinary
degree of depravity, within these thirty years, then must I be infected
with the common vice of old men, difficilis, querulus, laudator temporis
acti; or, which is more probable, the impetuous pursuits and avocations
of youth have formerly hindered me from observing those rotten parts of
human nature, which now appear so offensively to my observation.

We have been at court, and 'change, and every where; and every where we
find food for spleen, and subject for ridicule--My new servant,
Humphry Clinker, turns out a great original: and Tabby is a changed
creature--She has parted with Chowder; and does nothing but smile, like
Malvolio in the play--I'll be hanged if she is not acting a part which
is not natural to her disposition, for some purpose which I have not yet
discovered.

With respect to the characters of mankind, my curiosity is quite
satisfied: I have done with the science of men, and must now endeavour
to amuse myself with the novelty of things. I am, at present, by a
violent effort of the mind, forced from my natural bias; but this power
ceasing to act, I shall return to my solitude with redoubled velocity.
Every thing I see, and hear, and feel, in this great reservoir of folly,
knavery, and sophistication, contributes to inhance the value of a
country life, in the sentiments of

Yours always, MATT. BRAMBLE LONDON, June 2.




To Mrs MARY JONES, at Brambleton-hall.

DEAR MARY JONES,

Lady Griskin's botler, Mr Crumb, having got 'squire Barton to frank me
a kiver, I would not neglect to let you know how it is with me, and the
rest of the family.

I could not rite by John Thomas, for because he went away in a huff,
at a minutes' warning. He and Chowder could not agree, and so they fitt
upon the road, and Chowder bitt his thumb, and he swore he would do him
a mischief, and he spoke saucy to mistress, whereby the squire turned
him off in gudgeon; and by God's providence we picked up another
footman, called Umphry Klinker; a good sole as ever broke bread;
which shews that a scalded cat may prove a good mouser, and a hound be
staunch, thof he has got narro hare on his buttocks; but the proudest
nose may be bro't to the grinestone, by sickness and misfortunes.

0 Molly! what shall I say of London? All the towns that ever I beheld
in my born-days, are no more than Welsh barrows and crumlecks to this
wonderful sitty! Even Bath itself is but a fillitch, in the naam of
God--One would think there's no end of the streets, but the land's end.
Then there's such a power of people, going hurry skurry! Such a racket
of coxes! Such a noise, and haliballoo! So many strange sites to be
seen! O gracious! my poor Welsh brain has been spinning like a top ever
since I came hither! And I have seen the Park, and the paleass of Saint
Gimses, and the king's and the queen's magisterial pursing, and the
sweet young princes, and the hillyfents, and pye bald ass, and all the
rest of the royal family.

Last week I went with mistress to the Tower, to see the crowns and wild
beastis; and there was a monstracious lion, with teeth half a quarter
long; and a gentleman bid me not go near him, if I wasn't a maid; being
as how he would roar, and tear, and play the dickens--Now I had no mind
to go near him; for I cannot abide such dangerous honeymils, not I--but,
mistress would go; and the beast kept such a roaring and bouncing,
that I tho't he would have broke his cage and devoured us all; and the
gentleman tittered forsooth; but I'll go to death upon it, I will,
that my lady is as good a firchin, as the child unborn; and, therefore,
either the gentleman told a fib, or the lion oft to be set in the
stocks for bearing false witness agin his neighbour; for the commandment
sayeth, Thou shalt not bear false witness against thy neighbour.

I was afterwards of a party at Sadler's-wells, where I saw such tumbling
and dancing upon ropes and wires, that I was frightened and ready to
go into a fit--I tho't it was all inchantment; and, believing myself
bewitched, began for to cry--You knows as how the witches in Wales fly
upon broom-sticks: but here was flying without any broom-stick, or thing
in the varsal world, and firing of pistols in the air, and blowing of
trumpets, and swinging, and rolling of wheel-barrows upon a wire (God
bless us!) no thicker than a sewing-thread; that, to be sure, they must
deal with the devil!--A fine gentleman, with a pig's-tail, and a golden
sord by his side, come to comfit me, and offered for to treat me with
a pint of wind; but I would not stay; and so, in going through the dark
passage, he began to shew his cloven futt, and went for to be rude: my
fellow-sarvant, Umphry Klinker, bid him be sivil, and he gave the young
man a dowse in the chops; but, I fackins, Mr Klinker wa'n't long in
his debt--with a good oaken sapling he dusted his doublet, for all his
golden cheese toaster; and, fipping me under his arm, carried me huom, I
nose not how, being I was in such a flustration--But, thank God! I'm
now vaned from all such vanities; for what are all those rarities and
vagaries to the glory that shall be revealed hereafter? O Molly! let not
your poor heart be puffed up with vanity.

I had almost forgot to tell you, that I have had my hair cut and
pippered, and singed, and bolstered, and buckled, in the newest fashion,
by a French freezer--Parley vow Francey--Vee madmansell--I now carries
my head higher than arrow private gentlewoman of Vales. Last night,
coming huom from the meeting, I was taken by lamp-light for an iminent
poulterer's daughter, a great beauty--But as I was saying, this is all
vanity and vexation of spirit--The pleasures of London are no better
than sower whey and stale cyder, when compared to the joys of the new
Gerusalem.

Dear Mary Jones! An please God when I return, I'll bring you a new cap,
with a turkey-shell coom, and a pyehouse sermon, that was preached in
the Tabernacle; and I pray of all love, you will mind your vriting
and your spilling; for, craving your pardon, Molly, it made me suet
to disseyffer your last scrabble, which was delivered by the hind at
Bath--0, voman! voman! if thou had'st but the least consumption of what
pleasure we scullers have, when we can cunster the crabbidst buck off
hand, and spell the ethnitch vords without lucking at the primmer. As
for Mr Klinker, he is qualified to be a clerk to a parish--But I'll say
no more--Remember me to Saul--poor sole! it goes to my hart to think
she don't yet know her letters--But all in God's good time--It shall go
hard, but I will bring her the A B C in gingerbread; and that, you nose,
will be learning to her taste.

Mistress says, we are going a long gurney to the North; but go where we
will, I shall ever be,

Dear Mary Jones, Yours with true infection WIN. JENKINS LONDON, June 3.




To Sir WATKIN PHILLIPS, of Jesus college, Oxon.

DEAR WAT,

I mentioned in my last, my uncle's design of going to the duke of N--'s
levee; which design has been executed accordingly. His grace has been
so long accustomed to this kind of homage, that though the place he now
fills does not imply the tenth part of the influence, which he exerted
in his former office, he has given his friends to understand, that they
cannot oblige him in any thing more, than in contributing to support
the shadow of that power, which he no longer retains in substance; and
therefore he has still public days, on which they appear at his levee.

My uncle and I went thither with Mr Barton, who, being one of the duke's
adherents, undertook to be our introducer--The room was pretty well
filled with people, in a great variety of dress; but there was no more
than one gown and cassock, though I was told his grace had, while he was
minister, preferred almost every individual that now filled the bench of
bishops in the house of lords; but in all probability, the gratitude of
the clergy is like their charity, which shuns the light--Mr Barton
was immediately accosted by a person well stricken in years, tall, and
raw-boned, with a hook-nose, and an arch leer, that indicated, at least,
as much cunning as sagacity. Our conductor saluted him, by the name of
captain C--, and afterwards informed us he was a man of shrewd parts,
whom the government occasionally employed in secret services. But I have
had the history of him more at large, from another quarter. He had been,
many years ago, concerned in fraudulent practices, as a merchant, in
France; and being convicted of some of them, was sent to the gallies,
from whence he was delivered by the interest of the late duke of Ormond,
to whom he had recommended himself in letter, as his name-sake and
relation--He was in the sequel, employed by our ministry as a spy;
and in the war of 1740, traversed all Spain, as well as France, in the
disguise of a capuchin, at the extreme hazard of his life, in as much as
the court of Madrid had actually got scent of him, and given orders to
apprehend him at St Sebastian's, from whence he had fortunately retired
but a few hours before the order arrived. This and other hair-breadth
'scapes he pleaded so effectually as a merit with the English ministry,
that they allowed him a comfortable pension, which he now enjoys in his
old age--He has still access to all the ministers, and is said to be
consulted by them on many subjects, as a man of uncommon understanding
and great experience--He is, in fact, a fellow of some parts, and
invincible assurance; and, in his discourse, he assumes such an air
of self-sufficiency, as may very well impose upon some of the shallow
politicians, who now labour at the helm of administration. But, if he is
not belied, this is not the only imposture of which he is guilty--They
say, he is at bottom not only a Roman-catholic, but really a priest; and
while he pretends to disclose to our state-pilots all the springs that
move the cabinet of Versailles, he is actually picking up intelligence
for the service of the French minister. Be that as it may, captain
C-- entered into conversation with us in the most familiar manner, and
treated the duke's character without any ceremony--'This wiseacre (said
he) is still a-bed; and, I think, the best thing he can do, is to sleep
on till Christmas; for, when he gets up, he does nothing but expose his
own folly.--Since Grenville was turned out, there has been no minister
in this nation worth the meal that whitened his peri-wig--They are so
ignorant, they scarce know a crab from a cauliflower; and then they
are such dunces, that there's no making them comprehend the plainest
proposition--In the beginning of the war, this poor half-witted creature
told me, in a great fright, that thirty thousand French had marched
from Acadie to Cape Breton--"Where did they find transports? (said I)"
"Transports (cried he) I tell you they marched by land"--"By land to the
island of Cape Breton?" "What! is Cape Breton an island?" "Certainly."
"Ha! are you sure of that?" When I pointed it out in the map, he
examined it earnestly with his spectacles; then, taking me in his arms,
"My dear C--! (cried he) you always bring us good news--Egad! I'll go
directly, and tell the king that Cape Breton is an island."'

He seemed disposed to entertain us with more anecdotes of this nature,
at the expense of his grace, when he was interrupted by the arrival
of the Algerine ambassador; a venerable Turk, with a long white beard,
attended by his dragoman, or interpreter, and another officer of his
household, who had got no stockings to his legs--Captain C-- immediately
spoke with an air of authority to a servant in waiting, bidding him go
and tell the duke to rise, as there was a great deal of company come,
and, among others, the ambassador from Algiers. Then, turning to
us, 'This poor Turk (said he) notwithstanding his grey beard, is a
green-horn--He has been several years resident in London, and still is
ignorant of our political revolutions. This visit is intended for
the prime minister of England; but you'll see how this wise duke will
receive it as a mark of attachment to his own person'--Certain it is,
the duke seemed eager to acknowledge the compliment--A door opened,
he suddenly bolted out; with a shaving-cloth under his chin, his
face frothed up to the eyes with soap lather; and running up to the
ambassador, grinned hideous in his face--'My dear Mahomet! (said he) God
love your long beard, I hope the dey will make you a horsetail at the
next promotion, ha, ha, ha! Have but a moment's patience, and I'll send
to you in a twinkling,'--So saying, he retired into his den, leaving
the Turk in some confusion. After a short pause, however, he said
something to his interpreter, the meaning of which I had great
curiosity to know, as he turned up his eyes while he spoke, expressing
astonishment, mixed with devotion. We were gratified by means of the
communicative captain C--, who conversed with the dragoman, as an old
acquaintance. Ibrahim, the ambassador, who had mistaken his grace for
the minister's fool, was no sooner undeceived by the interpreter, than
he exclaimed to this effect 'Holy prophet! I don't wonder that this
nation prospers, seeing it is governed by the counsel of ideots; a
series of men, whom all good mussulmen revere as the organs of immediate
inspiration!' Ibrahim was favoured with a particular audience of short
duration; after which the duke conducted him to the door, and
then returned to diffuse his gracious looks among the crowd of his
worshippers.

As Mr Barton advanced to present me to his grace, it was my fortune to
attract his notice, before I was announced--He forthwith met me more
than half way, and, seizing me by the hand, 'My dear Sir Francis! (cried
he) this is so kind--I vow to God! I am so obliged--Such attention to
a poor broken minister. Well--Pray when does your excellency set
sail?--For God's sake have a care of your health, and cat stewed
prunes in the passage. Next to your own precious health, pray, my dear
excellency, take care of the Five Nations--Our good friends the Five
Nations. The Toryrories, the Maccolmacks, the Out-o'the-ways, the
Crickets, and the Kickshaws--Let 'em have plenty of blankets, and
stinkubus, and wampum; and your excellency won't fail to scour
the kettle, and boil the chain, and bury the tree, and plant the
hatchet--Ha, ha, ha!' When he had uttered this rhapsody, with his usual
precipitation, Mr Barton gave him to understand, that I was neither Sir
Francis, nor St Francis, but simply Mr Melford, nephew to Mr Bramble;
who, stepping forward, made his bow at the same time. 'Odso! no more it
is Sir Francis--(said this wise statesman) Mr Melford, I'm glad to
see you--I sent you an engineer to fortify your dock--Mr Bramble--your
servant, Mr Bramble--How d'ye, good Mr Bramble? Your nephew is a pretty
young fellow--Faith and troth, a very pretty fellow!--His father is
my old friend--How does he hold it? Still troubled with that damned
disorder, ha?' 'No, my lord (replied my uncle), all his troubles are
over--He has been dead these fifteen years.' 'Dead! how--Yes faith!
now I remember: he is dead sure enough--Well, and how--does the
young gentleman stand for Haverford West? or--a what d'ye. My dear Mr
Milfordhaven, I'll do you all the service in my power I hope I have some
credit left'--My uncle then gave him to understand, that I was still a
minor; and that we had no intention to trouble him at present, for any
favour whatsoever--'I came hither with my nephew (added he) to pay our
respects to your grace; and I may venture to say, that his views and
mine are at least as disinterested as those of any individual in this
assembly.' 'My dear Mr Brambleberry! you do me infinite honour--I shall
always rejoice to see you and your hopeful nephew, Mr Milfordhaven--My
credit, such as it is, you may command--I wish we had more friends of
your kidney.'

Then, turning to captain C--, 'Ha, C--! (said he) what news, C--? How
does the world wag? ha!' 'The world wags much after the old fashion, my
lord (answered the captain): the politicians of London and Westminster
have begun again to wag their tongues against your grace; and your
short-lived popularity wags like a feather, which the next puff of
antiministerial calumny will blow away'--'A pack of rascals (cried the
duke)--Tories, Jacobites, rebels; one half of them would wag their heels
at Tyburn, if they had their deserts'--So saying, he wheeled about;
and going round the levee, spoke to every individual, with the most
courteous familiarity; but he scarce ever opened his mouth without
making some blunder, in relation to the person or business of the party
with whom he conversed; so that he really looked like a comedian, hired
to burlesque the character of a minister--At length, a person of a very
prepossessing appearance coming in, his grace ran up, and, hugging him
in his arms, with the appellation of 'My dear Ch--s!' led him forthwith
into the inner apartment, or Sanctum Sanctorum of this political temple.
'That (said captain C--) is my friend C-- T--, almost the only man of
parts who has any concern in the present administration--Indeed, he
would have no concern at all in the matter, if the ministry did not find
it absolutely necessary to make use of his talents upon some particular
occasions--As for the common business of the nation, it is carried on in
a constant routine by the clerks of the different offices, otherwise the
wheels of government would be wholly stopt amidst the abrupt succession
of ministers, every one more ignorant than his predecessor--I am
thinking what a fine hovel we should be in, if all the clerks of the
treasury, the secretaries, of the war-office, and the admiralty, should
take it in their heads to throw up their places in imitation of the
great pensioner--But, to return to C-- T--; he certainly knows more
than all the ministry and all the opposition, if their heads were laid
together, and talks like an angel on a vast variety of subjects. He
would really be a great man, if he had any consistency or stability of
character--Then, it must be owned, he wants courage, otherwise he would
never allow himself to be cowed by the great political bully, for whose
understanding he has justly a very great contempt. I have seen him as
much afraid of that overbearing Hector, as ever schoolboy was of his
pedagogue; and yet this Hector, I shrewdly suspect, is no more than a
craven at bottom--Besides this defect, C-- has another, which he is
at too little pains to hide--There's no faith to be given to his
assertions, and no trust to be put in his promises--However, to give
the devil his due, he's very good-natured; and even friendly, when close
urged in the way of solicitation--As for principle, that's out of the
question--In a word, he is a wit and an orator, extremely entertaining,
and he shines very often at the expence even of those ministers to whom
he is a retainer. This is a mark of great imprudence, by which he has
made them all his enemies, whatever face they may put upon the matter;
and sooner or later he'll have cause to wish he had been able to keep
his own counsel. I have several times cautioned him on this subject;
but 'tis all preaching to the desert--His vanity runs away with his
discretion'--I could not help thinking the captain himself might have
been the better for some hints of the same nature--His panegyric,
excluding principle and veracity, puts me in mind of a contest I
once overheard, in the way of altercation, betwixt two apple-women
in Spring-garden--One of those viragos having hinted something to the
prejudice of the other's moral character, her antagonist, setting her
hands in her sides, replied--'Speak out, hussy--I scorn your malice--I
own I'm both a whore and a thief; and what more have you to say?--Damn
you, what more have you to say? baiting that, which all the world knows,
I challenge you to say black is the white of my eye'--We did not wait
for Mr T--'s coming forth; but after captain C-- had characterised all
the originals in waiting, we adjourned to a coffeehouse, where we had
buttered muffins and tea to breakfast, the said captain still favouring
us with his company--Nay, my uncle was so diverted with his anecdotes,
that he asked him to dinner, and treated him with a fine turbot, to
which he did ample justice--That same evening I spent at the tavern with
some friends, one of whom let me into C--'s character, which Mr Bramble
no sooner understood, than he expressed some concern for the connexion
he had made, and resolved to disengage himself from it without ceremony.

We are become members of the Society for the Encouragement of the Arts,
and have assisted at some of their deliberations, which were conducted
with equal spirit and sagacity--My uncle is extremely fond of the
institution, which will certainly be productive of great advantages to
the public, if, from its democratical form, it does not degenerate into
cabal and corruption--You are already acquainted with his aversion to
the influence of the multitude, which, he affirms, is incompatible with
excellence, and subversive of order--Indeed his detestation of the mob
has been heightened by fear, ever since he fainted in the room at Bath;
and this apprehension has prevented him from going to the Little Theatre
in the Hay-market, and other places of entertainment, to which, however,
I have had the honour to attend the ladies.

It grates old Square-toes to reflect, that it is not in his power to
enjoy even the most elegant diversions of the capital, without the
participation of the vulgar; for they now thrust themselves into all
assemblies, from a ridotto at St James's, to a hop at Rotherhithe. I
have lately seen our old acquaintance Dick Ivy, who we imagined had died
of dram-drinking; but he is lately emerged from the Fleet, by means of
a pamphlet which he wrote and published against the government with some
success. The sale of this performance enabled him to appear in clean
linen, and he is now going about soliciting subscriptions for his Poems;
but his breeches are not yet in the most decent order.

Dick certainly deserves some countenance for his intrepidity and
perseverance--It is not in the power of disappointment, nor even of
damnation, to drive him to despair--After some unsuccessful essays in
the way of poetry, he commenced brandy-merchant, and I believe his
whole stock ran out through his own bowels; then he consorted with a
milk-woman, who kept a cellar in Petty France: but he could not make his
quarters good; he was dislodged and driven up stairs into the kennel by
a corporal in the second regiment of foot-guards--He was afterwards the
laureat of Blackfriars, from whence there was a natural transition to
the Fleet--As he had formerly miscarried in panegyric, he now turned his
thoughts to satire, and really seems to have some talent for abuse. If
he can hold out till the meeting of the parliament, and be prepared
for another charge, in all probability Dick will mount the pillory,
or obtain a pension, in either of which events his fortune will be
made--Mean while he has acquired some degree of consideration with the
respectable writers of the age; and as I have subscribed for his works,
he did me the favour t'other night to introduce me to a society of those
geniuses; but I found them exceedingly formal and reserved--They
seemed afraid and jealous of one another, and sat in a state of mutual
repulsion, like so many particles of vapour, each surrounded by its own
electrified atmosphere. Dick, who has more vivacity than judgment, tried
more than once to enliven the conversation; sometimes making an effort
at wit, sometimes letting off a pun, and sometimes discharging a
conundrum; nay, at length he started a dispute upon the hackneyed
comparison betwixt blank verse and rhyme, and the professors opened with
great clamour; but, instead of keeping to the subject, they launched
out into tedious dissertations on the poetry of the ancients; and one
of them, who had been a school-master, displayed his whole knowledge of
prosody, gleaned from Disputer and Ruddiman. At last, I ventured to say,
I did not see how the subject in question could be at all elucidated by
the practice of the ancients, who certainly had neither blank verse
nor rhyme in their poems, which were measured by feet, whereas ours are
reckoned by the number of syllables--This remark seemed to give umbrage
to the pedant, who forthwith involved himself in a cloud of Greek and
Latin quotations, which nobody attempted to dispel--A confused hum of
insipid observations and comments ensued; and, upon the whole, I never
passed a duller evening in my life--Yet, without all doubt, some of them
were men of learning, wit, and ingenuity. As they are afraid of making
free with one another, they should bring each his butt, or whet-stone,
along with him, for the entertainment of the company--My uncle says, he
never desires to meet with more than one wit at a time--One wit, like a
knuckle of ham in soup, gives a zest and flavour to the dish; but more
than one serves only to spoil the pottage--And now I'm afraid I have
given you an unconscionable mess, without any flavour at all; for which,
I suppose, you will bestow your benedictions upon

Your friend, and servant J. MELFORD LONDON, June 5




To Dr LEWIS.

DEAR LEWIS

Your fable of the monkey and the pig, is what the Italians call ben
trovata: but I shall not repeat it to my apothecary, who is a proud
Scotchman, very thin skinned, and, for aught I know, may have his degree
in his pocket--A right Scotchman has always two strings to his bow, and
is in utrumque paratus--Certain it is, I have not 'scaped a scouring;
but, I believe, by means of that scouring, I have 'scaped something
worse, perhaps a tedious fit of the gout or rheumatism; for my appetite
began to flag, and I had certain croakings in the bowels, which boded me
no good--Nay, I am not yet quite free of these remembrances, which warn
me to be gone from this centre of infection--

What temptation can a man of my turn and temperament have, to live in
a place where every corner teems with fresh objects of detestation
and disgust? What kind of taste and organs must those people have,
who really prefer the adulterate enjoyments of the town to the genuine
pleasures of a country retreat? Most people, I know, are originally
seduced by vanity, ambition, and childish curiosity; which cannot be
gratified, but in the busy haunts of men: but, in the course of this
gratification, their very organs of sense are perverted, and they become
habitually lost to every relish of what is genuine and excellent in its
own nature.

Shall I state the difference between my town grievances, and my country
comforts? At Brambleton-hall, I have elbow-room within doors, and
breathe a clear, elastic, salutary air--I enjoy refreshing sleep, which
is never disturbed by horrid noise, nor interrupted, but in a-morning,
by the sweet twitter of the martlet at my window--I drink the virgin
lymph, pure and chrystalline as it gushes from the rock, or the
sparkling beveridge, home-brewed from malt of my own making; or I
indulge with cyder, which my own orchard affords; or with claret of
the best growth, imported for my own use, by a correspondent on whose
integrity I can depend; my bread is sweet and nourishing, made from my
own wheat, ground in my own mill, and baked in my own oven; my table
is, in a great measure, furnished from my own ground; my five-year old
mutton, fed on the fragrant herbage of the mountains, that might vie
with venison in juice and flavour; my delicious veal, fattened with
nothing but the mother's milk, that fills the dish with gravy; my
poultry from the barn-door, that never knew confinement, but when they
were at roost; my rabbits panting from the warren; my game fresh from
the moors; my trout and salmon struggling from the stream; oysters from
their native banks; and herrings, with other sea fish, I can eat in
four hours after they are taken--My sallads, roots, and potherbs, my own
garden yields in plenty and perfection; the produce of the natural
soil, prepared by moderate cultivation. The same soil affords all the
different fruits which England may call her own, so that my dessert is
every day fresh-gathered from the tree; my dairy flows with nectarious
tildes of milk and cream, from whence we derive abundance of excellent
butter, curds, and cheese; and the refuse fattens my pigs, that are
destined for hams and bacon--I go to bed betimes, and rise with the
sun--I make shift to pass the hours without weariness or regret, and
am not destitute of amusements within doors, when the weather will not
permit me to go abroad--I read, and chat, and play at billiards, cards
or back-gammon--Without doors, I superintend my farm, and execute
plans of improvements, the effects of which I enjoy with unspeakable
delight--Nor do I take less pleasure in seeing my tenants thrive under
my auspices, and the poor live comfortably by the employment which I
provide--You know I have one or two sensible friends, to whom I can open
all my heart; a blessing which, perhaps, I might have sought in vain
among the crowded scenes of life: there are a few others of more humble
parts, whom I esteem for their integrity; and their conversation I find
inoffensive, though not very entertaining. Finally, I live in the midst
of honest men, and trusty dependents, who, I flatter myself, have a
disinterested attachment to my person. You, yourself, my dear Doctor,
can vouch for the truth of these assertions.

Now, mark the contrast at London--I am pent up in frowzy lodgings, where
there is not room enough to swing a cat; and I breathe the steams
of endless putrefaction; and these would, undoubtedly, produce a
pestilence, if they were not qualified by the gross acid of sea-coal,
which is itself a pernicious nuisance to lungs of any delicacy of
texture: but even this boasted corrector cannot prevent those languid,
sallow looks, that distinguish the inhabitants of London from those
ruddy swains that lead a country-life--I go to bed after midnight, jaded
and restless from the dissipations of the day--I start every hour from
my sleep, at the horrid noise of the watchmen bawling the hour through
every street, and thundering at every door; a set of useless fellows,
who serve no other purpose but that of disturbing the repose of the
inhabitants; and by five o'clock I start out of bed, in consequence
of the still more dreadful alarm made by the country carts, and noisy
rustics bellowing green pease under my window. If I would drink water,
I must quaff the maukish contents of an open aqueduct, exposed to all
manner of defilement; or swallow that which comes from the river
Thames, impregnated with all the filth of London and Westminster--Human
excrement is the least offensive part of the concrete, which is
composed of all the drugs, minerals, and poisons, used in mechanics and
manufacture, enriched with the putrefying carcasses of beasts and men;
and mixed with the scourings of all the wash-tubs, kennels, and common
sewers, within the bills of mortality.

This is the agreeable potation, extolled by the Londoners, as the finest
water in the universe--As to the intoxicating potion, sold for wine, it
is a vile, unpalatable, and pernicious sophistication, balderdashed with
cyder, corn-spirit, and the juice of sloes. In an action at law, laid
against a carman for having staved a cask of port, it appeared from the
evidence of the cooper, that there were not above five gallons of real
wine in the whole pipe, which held above a hundred, and even that had
been brewed and adulterated by the merchant at Oporto. The bread I
cat in London, is a deleterious paste, mixed up with chalk, alum, and
bone-ashes; insipid to the taste, and destructive to the constitution.
The good people are not ignorant of this adulteration--but they prefer
it to wholesome bread, because it is whiter than the meal of corn: thus
they sacrifice their taste and their health, and the lives of their
tender infants, to a most absurd gratification of a mis-judging eye; and
the miller, or the baker, is obliged to poison them and their families,
in order to live by his profession. The same monstrous depravity appears
in their veal, which is bleached by repeated bleedings, and other
villainous arts, till there is not a drop of juice left in the body,
and the poor animal is paralytic before it dies; so void of all taste,
nourishment, and savour, that a man might dine as comfortably on a white
fricassee of kid-skin gloves; or chip hats from Leghorn.

As they have discharged the natural colour from their bread, their
butchers-meat, and poultry, their cutlets, ragouts, fricassees and
sauces of all kinds; so they insist upon having the complexion of their
potherbs mended, even at the hazard of their lives. Perhaps, you will
hardly believe they can be so mad as to boil their greens with brass
halfpence, in order to improve their colour; and yet nothing is more
true--Indeed, without this improvement in the colour, they have no
personal merit. They are produced in an artificial soil, and taste
of nothing but the dunghills, from whence they spring. My cabbage,
cauliflower, and 'sparagus in the country, are as much superior in
flavour to those that are sold in Covent-garden, as my heath-mutton is
to that of St James's-market; which in fact, is neither lamb nor mutton,
but something betwixt the two, gorged in the rank fens of Lincoln and
Essex, pale, coarse, and frowzy--As for the pork, it is an abominable
carnivorous animal, fed with horse-flesh and distillers' grains; and
the poultry is all rotten, in consequence of a fever, occasioned by
the infamous practice of sewing up the gut, that they may be the sooner
fattened in coops, in consequence of this cruel retention.

Of the fish, I need say nothing in this hot weather, but that it comes
sixty, seventy, fourscore, and a hundred miles by land-carriage; a
circumstance sufficient without any comment, to turn a Dutchman's
stomach, even if his nose was not saluted in every alley with the sweet
flavour of fresh mackarel, selling by retail. This is not the season for
oysters; nevertheless, it may not be amiss to mention, that the right
Colchester are kept in slime-pits, occasionally overflowed by the sea;
and that the green colour, so much admired by the voluptuaries of this
metropolis, is occasioned by the vitriolic scum, which rises on the
surface of the stagnant and stinking water--Our rabbits are bred and
fed in the poulterer's cellar, where they have neither air nor exercise,
consequently they must be firm in flesh, and delicious in flavour; and
there is no game to be had for love or money.

It must be owned, the Covent-garden affords some good fruit; which,
however, is always engrossed by a few individuals of overgrown fortune,
at an exorbitant price; so that little else than the refuse of the
market falls to the share of the community; and that is distributed
by such filthy hands, as I cannot look at without loathing. It was but
yesterday that I saw a dirty barrow-bunter in the street, cleaning her
dusty fruit with her own spittle; and, who knows but some fine lady
of St James's parish might admit into her delicate mouth those very
cherries, which had been rolled and moistened between the filthy, and,
perhaps, ulcerated chops of a St Giles's huckster--I need not dwell upon
the pallid, contaminated mash, which they call strawberries; soiled and
tossed by greasy paws through twenty baskets crusted with dirt; and then
presented with the worst milk, thickened with the worst flour, into a
bad likeness of cream: but the milk itself should not pass unanalysed,
the produce of faded cabbage-leaves and sour draff, lowered with hot
water, frothed with bruised snails, carried through the streets in open
pails, exposed to foul rinsings, discharged from doors and windows,
spittle, snot, and tobacco-quids from foot passengers, overflowings from
mud carts, spatterings from coach wheels, dirt and trash chucked into it
by roguish boys for the joke's sake, the spewings of infants, who have
slabbered in the tin-measure, which is thrown back in that condition
among the milk, for the benefit of the next customer; and, finally,
the vermin that drops from the rags of the nasty drab that vends this
precious mixture, under the respectable denomination of milk-maid.

I shall conclude this catalogue of London dainties, with that
table-beer, guiltless of hops and malt, vapid and nauseous; much fitter
to facilitate the operation of a vomit, than to quench thirst and
promote digestion; the tallowy rancid mass, called butter, manufactured
with candle grease and kitchen stuff; and their fresh eggs, imported
from France and Scotland.--Now, all these enormities might be remedied
with a very little attention to the article of police, or civil
regulation; but the wise patriots of London have taken it into their
heads, that all regulation is inconsistent with liberty; and that every
man ought to live in his own way, without restraint--Nay, as there is
not sense enough left among them, to be discomposed by the nuisance I
have mentioned, they may, for aught I care, wallow in the mire of their
own pollution.

A companionable man will, undoubtedly put up with many inconveniences
for the sake of enjoying agreeable society. A facetious friend of mine
used to say, the wine could not be bad, where the company was agreeable;
a maxim which, however, ought to be taken cum grano salis: but what
is the society of London, that I should be tempted, for its sake, to
mortify my senses, and compound with such uncleanness as my soul abhors?
All the people I see, are too much engrossed by schemes of interest or
ambition, to have any room left for sentiment or friendship. Even in
some of my old acquaintance, those schemes and pursuits have obliterated
all traces of our former connexion--Conversation is reduced to party
disputes, and illiberal altercation--Social commerce, to formal visits
and card-playing--If you pick up a diverting original by accident, it
may be dangerous to amuse yourself with his oddities--He is generally a
tartar at bottom; a sharper, a spy, or a lunatic. Every person you deal
with endeavours to overreach you in the way of business; you are preyed
upon by idle mendicants, who beg in the phrase of borrowing, and live
upon the spoils of the stranger--Your tradesmen are without conscience,
your friends without affection, and your dependents without fidelity.--

My letter would swell into a treatise, were I to particularize every
cause of offence that fills up the measure of my aversion to this, and
every other crowded city--Thank Heaven! I am not so far sucked into
the vortex, but that I can disengage myself without any great effort of
philosophy--From this wild uproar of knavery, folly, and impertinence, I
shall fly with double relish to the serenity of retirement, the cordial
effusions of unreserved friendship, the hospitality and protection
of the rural gods; in a word, the jucunda oblivia Vitae, which Horace
himself had not taste enough to enjoy.--

I have agreed for a good travelling-coach and four, at a guinea a day,
for three months certain; and next week we intend to begin our
journey to the North, hoping still to be with you by the latter end of
October--I shall continue to write from every stage where we make any
considerable halt, as often as anything occurs, which I think can
afford you the least amusement. In the mean time, I must beg you will
superintend the oeconomy of Barns, with respect to my hay and corn
harvests; assured that my ground produces nothing but what you may
freely call your own--On any other terms I should be ashamed to
subscribe myself

Your unvariable friend, MATT. BRAMBLE LONDON, June 8.




To Sir WATKIN PHILLIPS, Bart. of Jesus college, Oxon.

DEAR PHILLIPS,

In my last, I mentioned my having spent an evening with a society of
authors, who seemed to be jealous and afraid of one another. My uncle
was not at all surprised to hear me say I was disappointed in their
conversation. 'A man may be very entertaining and instructive upon paper
(said he), and exceedingly dull in common discourse. I have observed,
that those who shine most in private company, are but secondary stars
in the constellation of genius--A small stock of ideas is more easily
managed, and sooner displayed, than a great quantity crowded together.
There is very seldom any thing extraordinary in the appearance and
address of a good writer; whereas a dull author generally distinguishes
himself by some oddity or extravagance. For this reason, I fancy, that
an assembly of Grubs must be very diverting.'

My curiosity being excited by this hint, I consulted my friend Dick Ivy,
who undertook to gratify it the very next day, which was Sunday last.
He carried me to dine with S--, whom you and I have long known by his
writings.--He lives in the skirts of the town, and every Sunday his
house is opened to all unfortunate brothers of the quill, whom he treats
with beef, pudding, and potatoes, port, punch, and Calvert's entire butt
beer. He has fixed upon the first day of the week for the exercise of
his hospitality, because some of his guests could not enjoy it on any
other, for reasons that I need not explain. I was civilly received in
a plain, yet decent habitation, which opened backwards into a very
pleasant garden, kept in excellent order; and, indeed, I saw none of the
outward signs of authorship, either in the house or the landlord, who
is one of those few writers of the age that stand upon their own
foundation, without patronage, and above dependence. If there was
nothing characteristic in the entertainer, the company made ample amends
for his want of singularity.

At two in the afternoon, I found myself one of ten messmates seated at
table; and, I question, if the whole kingdom could produce such another
assemblage of originals. Among their peculiarities, I do not mention
those of dress, which may be purely accidental. What struck me were
oddities originally produced by affectation, and afterwards confirmed
by habit. One of them wore spectacles at dinner, and another his hat
flapped; though (as Ivy told me) the first was noted for having a
seaman's eye, when a bailiff was in the wind; and the other was never
known to labour under any weakness or defect of vision, except about
five years ago, when he was complimented with a couple of black eyes by
a player, with whom he had quarrelled in his drink. A third wore a laced
stocking, and made use of crutches, because, once in his life, he had
been laid up with a broken leg, though no man could leap over a stick
with more agility. A fourth had contracted such an antipathy to the
country, that he insisted upon sitting with his back towards the window
that looked into the garden, and when a dish of cauliflower was set upon
the table, he snuffed up volatile salts to keep him from fainting; yet
this delicate person was the son of a cottager, born under a hedge,
and had many years run wild among asses on a common. A fifth affected
distraction. When spoke to, he always answered from the purpose
sometimes he suddenly started up, and rapped out a dreadful oath
sometimes he burst out a-laughing--then he folded his arms, and sighed
and then, he hissed like fifty serpents.

At first I really thought he was mad, and, as he sat near me, began
to be under some apprehensions for my own safety, when our landlord,
perceiving me alarmed, assured me aloud that I had nothing to fear. 'The
gentleman (said he) is trying to act a part for which he is by no means
qualified--if he had all the inclination in the world, it is not in his
power to be mad. His spirits are too flat to be kindled into frenzy.'
''Tis no bad p-p-puff, however (observed a person in a tarnished
laced coat): aff-ffected in-madness w-will p-pass for w-wit w-with
nine-ninet-teen out of t-twenty.'--'And affected stuttering for humour:
replied our landlord, tho', God knows, there is an affinity betwixt
them.' It seems, this wag, after having made some abortive attempts
in plain speaking, had recourse to this defect, by means of which he
frequently extorted the laugh of the company, without the least expence
of genius; and that imperfection, which he had at first counterfeited,
was now become so habitual, that he could not lay it aside.

A certain winking genius, who wore yellow gloves at dinner, had, on his
first introduction, taken such offence at S--, because he looked
and talked, and ate and drank like any other man, that he spoke
contemptuously of his understanding ever after, and never would repeat
his visit, until he had exhibited the following proof of his caprice.
Wat Wyvil, the poet, having made some unsuccessful advances towards an
intimacy with S--, at last gave him to understand, by a third person,
that he had written a poem in his praise, and a satire against his
person; that if he would admit him to his house, the first should be
immediately sent to press; but that if he persisted in declining his
friendship, he would publish his satire without delay. S-- replied, that
he looked upon Wyvil's panegyrick, as in effect, a species of infamy,
and would resent it accordingly with a good cudgel; but if he published
the satire, he might deserve his compassion, and had nothing to fear
from his revenge. Wyvil having considered the alternative, resolved to
mortify S-- by printing the panegyrick, for which he received a sound
drubbing. Then he swore the peace against the aggressor, who, in order
to avoid a prosecution at law, admitted him to his good graces. It was
the singularity in S--'s conduct, on this occasion, that reconciled him
to the yellow-gloved philosopher, who owned he had some genius, and from
that period cultivated his acquaintance.

Curious to know upon what subjects the several talents of my
fellow-guests were employed, I applied to my communicative friend Dick
Ivy, who gave me to understand, that most of them were, or had been,
understrappers, or journeymen, to more creditable authors, for whom they
translated, collated, and compiled, in the business of bookmaking; and
that all of them had, at different times, laboured in the service of
our landlord, though they had now set up for themselves in various
departments of literature. Not only their talents, but also their
nations and dialects were so various, that our conversation resembled
the confusion of tongues at Babel. We had the Irish brogue, the
Scotch accent, and foreign idiom, twanged off by the most discordant
vociferation; for, as they all spoke together, no man had any chance
to be heard, unless he could bawl louder than his fellows. It must be
owned, however, there was nothing pedantic in their discourse; they
carefully avoided all learned disquisitions, and endeavoured to be
facetious; nor did their endeavours always miscarry--some droll repartee
passed, and much laughter was excited; and if any individual lost his
temper so far as to transgress the bounds of decorum, he was effectually
checked by the master of the feast, who exerted a sort of paternal
authority over this irritable tribe.

The most learned philosopher of the whole collection, who had been
expelled the university for atheism, has made great progress in a
refutation of lord Bolingbroke's metaphysical works, which is said to
be equally ingenious, and orthodox; but, in the mean time, he has been
presented to the grand jury as a public nuisance, for having blasphemed
in an ale-house on the Lord's day. The Scotchman gives lectures on the
pronunciation of the English language, which he is now publishing by
subscription.

The Irishman is a political writer, and goes by the name of my Lord
Potatoe. He wrote a pamphlet in vindication of a minister, hoping his
zeal would be rewarded with some place or pension; but, finding himself
neglected in that quarter, he whispered about, that the pamphlet was
written by the minister himself, and he published an answer to his own
production. In this, he addressed the author under the title of your
lordship with such solemnity, that the public swallowed the deceit, and
bought up the whole impression. The wise politicians of the metropolis
declared they were both masterly performances, and chuckled over the
flimsy reveries of an ignorant garretteer, as the profound speculations
of a veteran statesman, acquainted with all the secrets of the cabinet.
The imposture was detected in the sequel, and our Hibernian pamphleteer
retains no part of his assumed importance, but the bare title of
my lord. and the upper part of the table at the potatoe-ordinary in
Shoelane.

Opposite to me sat a Piedmontese, who had obliged the public with
a humorous satire, intituled, The Ballance of the English Poets, a
performance which evinced the great modesty and taste of the author,
and, in particular, his intimacy with the elegancies of the English
language. The sage, who laboured under the agrophobia, or horror of
green fields, had just finished a treatise on practical agriculture,
though, in fact, he had never seen corn growing in his life, and was
so ignorant of grain, that our entertainer, in the face of the whole
company, made him own, that a plate of hominy was the best rice pudding
he had ever eat.

The stutterer had almost finished his travels through Europe and part
of Asia, without ever budging beyond the liberties of the King's Bench,
except in term-time, with a tipstaff for his companion; and as for
little Tim Cropdale, the most facetious member of the whole society,
he had happily wound up the catastrophe of a virgin tragedy, from the
exhibition of which he promised himself a large fund of profit and
reputation. Tim had made shift to live many years by writing novels,
at the rate of five pounds a volume; but that branch of business is now
engrossed by female authors, who publish merely for the propagation of
virtue, with so much ease and spirit, and delicacy, and knowledge of the
human heart, and all in the serene tranquillity of high life, that the
reader is not only inchanted by their genius, but reformed by their
morality.

After dinner, we adjourned into the garden, where, I observed, Mr S--
gave a short separate audience to every individual in a small remote
filbert walk, from whence most of them dropt off one after another,
without further ceremony; but they were replaced by fresh recruits of
the same clan, who came to make an afternoon's visit; and, among others,
a spruce bookseller, called Birkin, who rode his own gelding, and made
his appearance in a pair of new jemmy boots, with massy spurs of plate.
It was not without reason, that this midwife of the Muses used exercise
a-horseback, for he was too fat to walk a-foot, and he underwent some
sarcasms from Tim Cropdale, on his unwieldy size and inaptitude for
motion. Birkin, who took umbrage at this poor author's petulance in
presuming to joke upon a man so much richer than himself, told him, he
was not so unwieldy but that he could move the Marshalsea court for a
writ, and even overtake him with it, if he did not very speedily come
and settle accounts with him, respecting the expence of publishing his
last ode to the king of Prussia, of which he had sold but three, and
one of them was to Whitfield the methodist. Tim affected to receive this
intimation with good humour, saying, he expected in a post or two, from
Potsdam, a poem of thanks from his Prussian majesty, who knew very well
how to pay poets in their own coin; but, in the mean time, he proposed,
that Mr Birkin and he should run three times round the garden for a bowl
of punch, to be drank at Ashley's in the evening, and he would run boots
against stockings. The bookseller, who valued himself upon his mettle,
was persuaded to accept the challenge, and he forthwith resigned
his boots to Cropdale, who, when he had put them on, was no bad
representation of captain Pistol in the play.

Every thing being adjusted, they started together with great
impetuosity, and, in the second round, Birkin had clearly the advantage,
larding the lean earth as he puff'd along. Cropdale had no mind to
contest the victory further; but, in a twinkling, disappeared through
the back-door of the garden, which opened into a private lane, that had
communication with the high road.--The spectators immediately began to
hollow, 'Stole away!' and Birkin set off in pursuit of him with great
eagerness; but he had not advanced twenty yards in the lane, when a
thorn running into his foot, sent him hopping back into the garden,
roaring with pain, and swearing with vexation. When he was delivered
from this annoyance by the Scotchman, who had been bred to surgery, he
looked about him wildly, exclaiming, 'Sure, the fellow won't be such
a rogue as to run clear away with my boots!' Our landlord, having
reconnoitered the shoes he had left, which, indeed, hardly deserved that
name, 'Pray (said he), Mr Birkin, wa'n't your boots made of calf-skin?'
'Calf-skin or cow-skin (replied the other) I'll find a slip of
sheep-skin that will do his business--I lost twenty pounds by his farce
which you persuaded me to buy--I am out of pocket five pounds by
his damn'd ode; and now this pair of boots, bran new, cost me
thirty shillings, as per receipt--But this affair of the boots is
felony--transportation.--I'll have the dog indicted at the Old Bailey--I
will, Mr S-- I will be reveng'd, even though I should lose my debt in
consequence of his conviction.'

Mr S-- said nothing at present, but accommodated him with a pair of
shoes; then ordered his servant to rub him down, and comfort him with a
glass of rum-punch, which seemed, in a great measure, to cool the rage
of his indignation. 'After all (said our landlord) this is no more
than a humbug in the way of wit, though it deserves a more respectable
epithet, when considered as an effort of invention. Tim, being (I
suppose) out of credit with the cordwainer, fell upon this ingenious
expedient to supply the want of shoes, knowing that Mr Birkin, who
loves humour, would himself relish the joke upon a little recollection.
Cropdale literally lives by his wit, which he has exercised upon all his
friends in their turns. He once borrowed my poney for five or six days
to go to Salisbury, and sold him in Smithfield at his return. This was
a joke of such a serious nature, that, in the first transports of my
passion, I had some thoughts of prosecuting him for horse-stealing;
and even when my resentment had in some measure subsided, as he
industriously avoided me, I vowed, I would take satisfaction on his ribs
with the first opportunity. One day, seeing him at some distance in the
street, coming towards me, I began to prepare my cane for action, and
walked in the shadow of a porter, that he might not perceive me soon
enough to make his escape; but, in the very instant I had lifted up
the instrument of correction, I found Tim Cropdale metamorphosed into a
miserable blind wretch, feeling his way with a long stick from post to
post, and rolling about two bald unlighted orbs instead of eyes. I
was exceedingly shocked at having so narrowly escaped the concern and
disgrace that would have attended such a misapplication of vengeance:
but, next day, Tim prevailed upon a friend of mine to come and solicit
my forgiveness, and offer his note, payable in six weeks, for the price
of the poney. This gentleman gave me to understand, that the blind man
was no other than Cropdale, who having seen me advancing, and
guessing my intent, had immediately converted himself into the object
aforesaid--I was so diverted at the ingenuity of the evasion, that I
agreed to pardon his offence, refusing his note, however, that I might
keep a prosecution for felony hanging over his head, as a security for
his future good behaviour--But Timothy would by no means trust himself
in my hands till the note was accepted--then he made his appearance at
my door as a blind beggar, and imposed in such a manner upon my man, who
had been his old acquaintance and pot-companion, that the fellow threw
the door in his face, and even threatened to give him the bastinado.
Hearing a noise in the hall, I went thither, and immediately
recollecting the figure I had passed in the street, accosted him by his
own name, to the unspeakable astonishment of the footman.'

Birkin declared he loved a joke as well as another; but asked if any of
the company could tell where Mr Cropdale lodged, that he might send him
a proposal about restitution, before the boots should be made away with.
'I would willingly give him a pair of new shoes (said he), and half a
guinea into the bargain' for the boots, which fitted me like a glove;
and I shan't be able to get the fellows of them 'till the good weather
for riding is over. The stuttering wit declared, that the only secret
which Cropdale ever kept, was the place of his lodgings; but he
believed, that, during the heats of summer, he commonly took his
repose upon a bulk, or indulged himself, in fresco, with one of the
kennel-nymphs, under the portico of St Martin's church. 'Pox on him!
(cried the bookseller) he might as well have taken my whip and spurs. In
that case, he might have been tempted to steal another horse, and then
he would have rid to the devil of course.'

After coffee, I took my leave of Mr S--, with proper acknowledgments of
his civility, and was extremely well pleased with the entertainment of
the day, though not yet satisfied, with respect to the nature of this
connexion, betwixt a man of character in the literary world, and a
parcel of authorlings, who, in all probability, would never be able
to acquire any degree of reputation by their labours. On this head
I interrogated my conductor, Dick Ivy, who answered me to this
effect--'One would imagine S-- had some view to his own interest, in
giving countenance and assistance to those people, whom he knows to be
bad men, as well as bad writers; but, if he has any such view, he will
find himself disappointed; for if he is so vain as to imagine he can
make them, subservient to his schemes of profit or ambition, they are
cunning enough to make him their property in the mean time. There is not
one of the company you have seen to-day (myself excepted) who does
not owe him particular obligations--One of them he bailed out of a
spunging-house, and afterwards paid the debt--another he translated into
his family, and clothed, when he was turned out half naked from jail in
consequence of an act for the relief of insolvent debtors--a third, who
was reduced to a woollen night cap, and lived upon sheeps trotters, up
three pair of stairs backward in Butcher-row, he took into present pay
and free quarters, and enabled him to appear as a gentleman, without
having the fear of sheriff's officers before his eyes. Those who are in
distress he supplies with money when he has it, and with his credit when
he is out of cash. When they want business, he either finds employment
for them in his own service, or recommends them to booksellers to
execute some project he has formed for their subsistence. They are
always welcome to his table (which though plain, is plentiful) and to
his good offices as far as they will go, and when they see Occasion,
they make use of his name with the most petulant familiarity; nay, they
do not even scruple to arrogate to themselves the merit of some of his
performances, and have been known to sell their own lucubrations as the
produce of his brain. The Scotchman you saw at dinner once personated
him at an alehouse in West-Smithfield and, in the character of S--, had
his head broke by a cow-keeper, for having spoke disrespectfully of the
Christian religion; but he took the law of him in his own person, and
the assailant was fain to give him ten pounds to withdraw his action.'

I observed, that all this appearance of liberality on the side of Mr S--
was easily accounted for, on the supposition that they flattered him
in private, and engaged his adversaries in public; and yet I was
astonished, when I recollected that I often had seen this writer
virulently abused in papers, poems, and pamphlets, and not a pen was
drawn in his defence 'But you will be more astonished (said he) when I
assure you, those very guests whom you saw at his table to-day, were
the authors of great part of that abuse; and he himself is well aware
of their particular favours, for they are all eager to detect and betray
one another.' 'But this is doing the devil's work for nothing (cried I).
What should induce them to revile their benefactor without provocation?'
'Envy (answered Dick) is the general incitement; but they are galled by
an additional scourge of provocation. S-- directs a literary journal,
in which their productions are necessarily brought to trial; and though
many of them have been treated with such lenity and favour as they
little deserved, yet the slightest censure, such as, perhaps, could not
be avoided with any pretensions to candour and impartiality, has rankled
in the hearts of those authors to such a degree, that they have taken
immediate vengeance on the critic in anonymous libels, letters,
and lampoons. Indeed, all the writers of the age, good, bad, and
indifferent, from the moment he assumed this office, became his enemies,
either professed or in petto, except those of his friends who knew they
had nothing to fear from his strictures; and he must be a wiser man than
me who can tell what advantage or satisfaction he derives from having
brought such a nest of hornets about his ears.'

I owned, that was a point which might deserve consideration; but still
I expressed a desire to know his real motives for continuing his
friendship to a set of rascals equally ungrateful and insignificant.--He
said, he did not pretend to assign any reasonable motive; that, if
the truth must be told, the man was, in point of conduct, a most
incorrigible fool; that, though he pretended to have a knack at hitting
off characters, he blundered strangely in the distribution of his
favours, which were generally bestowed on the most undeserving of those
who had recourse to his assistance; that, indeed, this preference was
not so much owing to want of discernment as to want of resolution, for
he had not fortitude enough to resist the importunity even of the most
worthless; and, as he did not know the value of money, there was very
little merit in parting with it so easily; that his pride was gratified
in seeing himself courted by such a number of literary dependents; that,
probably, he delighted in hearing them expose and traduce one another;
and, finally, from their information, he became acquainted with all the
transactions of Grubstreet, which he had some thoughts of compiling for
the entertainment of the public.

I could not help suspecting, from Dick's discourse, that he had some
particular grudge against S--, upon whose conduct he had put the worst
construction it would bear; and, by dint of cross-examination, I found
he was not at all satisfied with the character which had been given in
the Review of his last performance, though it had been treated civilly
in consequence of the author's application to the critic. By all
accounts, S-- is not without weakness and caprice; but he is certainly
good-humoured and civilized; nor do I find that there is any thing
overbearing, cruel, or implacable in his disposition.

I have dwelt so long upon authors, that you will perhaps suspect I
intend to enroll myself among the fraternity; but, if I were actually
qualified for the profession, it is at best but a desperate resource
against starving, as it affords no provision for old age and infirmity.
Salmon, at the age of fourscore, is now in a garret, compiling matter,
at a guinea a sheet, for a modern historian, who, in point of age, might
be his grandchild; and Psalmonazar, after having drudged half a century
in the literary mill, in all the simplicity and abstinence of an
Asiatic, subsists upon the charity of a few booksellers, just sufficient
to keep him from the parish, I think Guy, who was himself a bookseller,
ought to have appropriated one wing or ward of his hospital to the use
of decayed authors; though indeed, there is neither hospital, college,
nor workhouse, within the bills of mortality, large enough to contain
the poor of this society, composed, as it is, from the refuse of every
other profession.

I know not whether you will find any amusement in this account of an odd
race of mortals, whose constitution had, I own, greatly interested the
curiosity of

Yours, J. MELFORD LONDON, June 10.




To Miss LAETITIA WILLIS, at Gloucester.

MY DEAR LETTY,

There is something on my spirits, which I should not venture to
communicate by the post, but having the opportunity of Mrs Brentwood's
return, I seize it eagerly, to disburthen my poor heart, which is
oppressed with fear and vexation.--O Letty! what a miserable situation
it is, to be without a friend to whom one can apply for counsel and
consolation in distress! I hinted in my last, that one Mr Barton had
been very particular in his civilities: I can no longer mistake his
meaning--he has formally professed himself my admirer; and, after
a thousand assiduities, perceiving I made but a cold return to his
addresses, he had recourse to the mediation of lady Griskin, who has
acted the part of a very warm advocate in his behalf:--but, my dear
Willis, her ladyship over acts her part--she not only expatiates on the
ample fortune, the great connexions, and the unblemished character of
Mr Barton, but she takes the trouble to catechise me; and, two days ago,
peremptorily told me, that a girl of my age could not possibly resist so
many considerations, if her heart was not pre-engaged.

This insinuation threw me into such a flutter, that she could not but
observe my disorder; and, presuming upon the discovery, insisted upon
my making her the confidante of my passion. But, although I had not such
command of myself as to conceal the emotion of my heart, I am not such a
child as to disclose its secret to a person who would certainly use
them to its prejudice. I told her, it was no wonder if I was out of
countenance at her introducing a subject of conversation so unsuitable
to my years and inexperience; that I believed Mr Barton was a very
worthy gentleman, and I was much obliged to him for his good opinion;
but the affections were involuntary, and mine, in particular, had as
yet made no concessions in his favour. She shook her head with an air of
distrust that made me tremble; and observed, that if my affections were
free, they would submit to the decision of prudence, especially when
enforced by the authority of those who had a right to direct my conduct.
This remark implied a design to interest my uncle or my aunt, perhaps my
brother, in behalf of Mr Barton's passion; and I am sadly afraid that
my aunt is already gained over. Yesterday in the forenoon, he had been
walking with us in the Park, and stopping in our return at a toy-shop,
he presented her with a very fine snuff-box, and me with a gold etuis,
which I resolutely refused, till she commanded me to accept it on pain
of her displeasure: nevertheless, being still unsatisfied with respect
to the propriety of receiving this toy, I signified my doubts to my
brother, who said he would consult my uncle on the subject, and seemed
to think Mr Barton had been rather premature in his presents.

What will be the result of this consultation, Heaven knows; but I am
afraid it will produce an explanation with Mr Barton, who will, no
doubt, avow his passion, and solicit their consent to a connexion which
my soul abhors; for, my dearest Letty, it is not in my power to love Mr
Barton, even if my heart was untouched by any other tenderness. Not that
there is any thing disagreeable about his person, but there is a total
want of that nameless charm which captivates and controuls the inchanted
spirit at least, he appears to me to have this defect; but if he had
all the engaging qualifications which a man can possess, they would be
excited in vain against that constancy, which, I flatter myself, is the
characteristic of my nature. No, my dear Willis, I may be involved in
fresh troubles, and I believe I shall, from the importunities of this
gentleman and the violence of my relations; but my heart is incapable of
change.

You know I put no faith in dreams; and yet I have been much disturbed
by one that visited me last night.--I thought I was in a church, where
a certain person, whom you know, was on the point of being married to my
aunt; that the clergyman was Mr Barton, and that poor forlorn I, stood
weeping in a corner, half naked, and without shoes or stockings.--Now,
I know there is nothing so childish as to be moved by those vain
illusions; but, nevertheless, in spite of all my reason, this hath
made a strong impression upon my mind, which begins to be very gloomy.
Indeed, I have another more substantial cause of affliction--I have some
religious scruples, my dear friend, which lie heavy on my conscience.--I
was persuaded to go to the Tabernacle, where I heard a discourse that
affected me deeply.--I have prayed fervently to be enlightened, but
as yet I am not sensible of these inward motions, those operations of
grace, which are the signs of a regenerated spirit; and therefore I
begin to be in terrible apprehensions about the state of my poor soul.
Some of our family have had very uncommon accessions, particularly
my aunt and Mrs Jenkins, who sometimes speak as if they were really
inspired; so that I am not like to want for either exhortation or
example, to purify my thoughts, and recall them from the vanities of
this world, which, indeed, I would willingly resign, if it was in my
power; but to make this sacrifice, I must be enabled by such assistance
from above as hath not yet been indulged to

Your unfortunate friend, LYDIA MELFORD June 10.




To Sir WATKIN PHILLIPS, of Jesus college, Oxon.

DEAR PHILLIPS,

The moment I received your letter, I began to execute your
commission--With the assistance of mine host at the Bull and Gate, I
discovered the place to which your fugitive valet had retreated, and
taxed him with his dishonesty--The fellow was in manifest confusion at
sight of me, but he denied the charge with great confidence, till I told
him, that if he would give up the watch, which was a family piece, he
might keep the money and the clothes, and go to the devil his own way,
at his leisure; but if he rejected this proposal, I would deliver him
forthwith to the constable, whom I had provided for that purpose, and
he would carry him before the justice without further delay. After
some hesitation, he desired to speak with me in the next room, where he
produced the watch, with all its appendages, and I have delivered it to
our landlord, to be sent you by the first safe conveyance.

So much for business.

I shall grow vain, upon your saying you find entertainment in my
letters; barren, as they certainly are, of incident and importance,
because your amusement must arise, not from the matter, but from the
manner, which you know is all my own--Animated, therefore, by the
approbation of a person, whose nice taste and consummate judgment I can
no longer doubt, I will chearfully proceed with our memoirs--As it is
determined we shall set out next week for Yorkshire, I went to-day in
the forenoon with my uncle to see a carriage, belonging to a coachmaker
in our neighbourhood--Turning down a narrow lane, behind Longacre, we
perceived a crowd of people standing at a door; which, it seems, opened
into a kind of a methodist meeting, and were informed, that a footman
was then holding forth to the congregation within. Curious to see this
phoenomenon, we squeezed into the place with much difficulty; and who
should this preacher be, but the identical Humphry Clinker. He had
finished his sermon, and given out a psalm, the first stave of which he
sung with peculiar graces--But if we were astonished to see Clinker in
the pulpit, we were altogether confounded at finding all the females
of our family among the audience--There was lady Griskin, Mrs Tabitha
Bramble, Mrs Winifred Jenkins, my sister Liddy, and Mr Barton, and all
of them joined in the psalmody, with strong marks of devotion.

I could hardly keep my gravity on this ludicrous occasion; but old
Square-toes was differently affected--The first thing that struck him,
was the presumption of his lacquey, whom he commanded to come down, with
such an air of authority as Humphry did not think proper to disregard.
He descended immediately, and all the people were in commotion. Barton
looked exceedingly sheepish, lady Griskin flirted her fan, Mrs Tabby
groaned in spirit, Liddy changed countenance, and Mrs Jenkins sobbed as
if her heart was breaking--My uncle, with a sneer, asked pardon of the
ladies, for having interrupted their devotion, saying, he had particular
business with the preacher, whom he ordered to call a hackney-coach.
This being immediately brought up to the end of the lane, he handed
Liddy into it, and my aunt and I following him, we drove home, without
taking any further notice of the rest of the company, who still remained
in silent astonishment.

Mr Bramble, perceiving Liddy in great trepidation, assumed a milder
aspect, bidding her be under no concern, for he was not at all
displeased at any thing she had done--'I have no objection (said he)
to your being religiously inclined; but I don't think my servant is a
proper ghostly director for a devotee of your sex and character--if,
in fact (as I rather believe) your aunt is not the sole conductress of,
this machine'--Mrs Tabitha made no answer, but threw up the whites of
her eyes, as if in the act of ejaculation--Poor Liddy, said, she had no
right to the title of a devotee; that she thought there was no harm in
hearing a pious discourse, even if it came from a footman, especially
as her aunt was present; but that if she had erred from ignorance, she
hoped he would excuse it, as she could not bear the thoughts of living
under his displeasure. The old gentleman, pressing her hand with a
tender smile, said she was a good girl, and that he did not believe
her capable of doing any thing that could give him the least umbrage or
disgust.

When we arrived at our lodgings, he commanded Mr Clinker to attend him
up stairs, and spoke to him in these words--'Since you are called upon
by the spirit to preach and to teach, it is high time to lay aside the
livery of an earthly master; and for my part, I am unworthy to have an
apostle in my service'--'I hope (said Humphry) I have not failed in my
duty to your honour--I should be a vile wretch if I did, considering the
misery from which your charity and compassion relieved me--but having
an inward admonition of the spirit--' 'An admonition of the devil (cried
the squire, in a passion) What admonition, you blockhead? What right has
such a fellow as you to set up for a reformer?' 'Begging your honour's
pardon (replied Clinker) may not the new light of God's grace shine
upon the poor and the ignorant in their humility, as well as upon the
wealthy, and the philosopher in all his pride of human learning?' 'What
you imagine to be the new light of grace (said his master) I take to be
a deceitful vapour, glimmering through a crack in your upper story--In
a word, Mr Clinker, I will have no light in my family but what pays the
king's taxes, unless it be the light of reason, which you don't pretend
to follow.'

'Ah, sir! (cried Humphry) the light of reason, is no more in comparison
to the light I mean, than a farthing candle to the sun at noon'--'Very
true (said uncle), the one will serve to shew you your way, and the
other to dazzle and confound your weak brain. Heark ye, Clinker, you
are either an hypocritical knave, or a wrong-headed enthusiast; and in
either case, unfit for my service. If you are a quack in sanctity and
devotion, you will find it an easy matter to impose upon silly women,
and others of crazed understanding, who will contribute lavishly for
your support. If you are really seduced by the reveries of a disturbed
imagination, the sooner you lose your senses entirely, the better for
yourself and the community. In that case, some charitable person might
provide you with a dark room and clean straw in Bedlam, where it would
not be in your power to infect others with your fanaticism; whereas,
if you have just reflection enough left to maintain the character of a
chosen vessel in the meetings of the godly, you and your hearers will be
misled by a Will-i'the-wisp, from one error into another, till you are
plunged into religious frenzy; and then, perhaps, you will hang yourself
in despair' 'Which the Lord of his infinite mercy forbid! (exclaimed the
affrighted Clinker) It is very possible I may be under the temptation of
the devil, who wants to wreck me on the rocks of spiritual pride--Your
honour says, I am either a knave or a madman; now, as I'll assure your
honour, I am no knave, it follows that I must be mad; therefore, I
beseech your honour, upon my knees, to take my case into consideration,
that means may be used for my recovery'

The 'squire could not help smiling at the poor fellow's simplicity, and
promised to take care of him, provided he would mind the business of his
place, without running after the new light of methodism: but Mrs Tabitha
took offence at his humility, which she interpreted into poorness
of spirit and worldly mindedness. She upbraided him with the want of
courage to suffer for conscience sake--She observed, that if he should
lose his place for bearing testimony to the truth, Providence would not
fail to find him another, perhaps more advantageous; and, declaring that
it could not be very agreeable to live in a family where an inquisition
was established, retired to another room in great agitation.

My uncle followed her with a significant look, then, turning to the
preacher, 'You hear what my sister says--If you cannot live with me upon
such terms as I have prescribed, the vineyard of methodism lies before
you, and she seems very well disposed to reward your labour'--'I would
not willingly give offence to any soul upon earth (answered Humphry);
her ladyship has been very good to me, ever since we came to London; and
surely she has a heart turned for religious exercises; and both she and
lady Griskin sing psalms and hymns like two cherubims--But, at the same
time, I'm bound to love and obey your honour--It becometh not such a
poor ignorant fellow as me, to hold dispute with gentlemen of rank and
learning--As for the matter of knowledge, I am no more than a beast in
comparison of your honour; therefore I submit; and, with God's grace, I
will follow you to the world's end, if you don't think me too far gone
to be out of confinement'.

His master promised to keep him for some time longer on trial; then
desired to know in what manner lady Griskin and Mr Barton came to join
their religious society, he told him, that her ladyship was the person
who first carried my aunt and sister to the Tabernacle, whither he
attended them, and had his devotion kindled by Mr W--'s preaching: that
he was confirmed in this new way, by the preacher's sermons, which he
had bought and studied with great attention: that his discourse and
prayers had brought over Mrs Jenkins and the house-maid to the same
way of thinking; but as for Mr Barton, he had never seen him at service
before this day, when he came in company with lady Griskin. Humphry,
moreover, owned that he had been encouraged to mount the rostrum, by
the example and success of a weaver, who was much followed as a powerful
minister: that on his first trial he found himself under such strong
impulsions, as made him believe he was certainly moved by the spirit;
and that he had assisted in lady Griskin's, and several private houses,
at exercises of devotion.

Mr Bramble was no sooner informed, that her ladyship had acted as the
primum mobile of this confederacy, than he concluded she had only made
use of Clinker as a tool, subservient to the execution of some design,
to the true secret of which he was an utter stranger--He observed, that
her ladyship's brain was a perfect mill for projects; and that she and
Tabby had certainly engaged in some secret treaty, the nature of which
he could not comprehend. I told him I thought it was no difficult matter
to perceive the drift of Mrs Tabitha, which was to ensnare the heart
of Barton, and that in all likelihood my lady Griskin acted as her
auxiliary: that this supposition would account for their endeavours to
convert him to methodism; an event which would occasion a connexion of
souls that might be easily improved into a matrimonial union.

My uncle seemed to be much diverted by the thoughts of this Scheme's
succeeding; but I gave him to understand, that Barton was pre-engaged:
that he had the day before made a present of an etuis to Liddy,
which her aunt had obliged her to receive, with a view, no doubt, to
countenance her own accepting of a snuff-box at the same time; that my
sister having made me acquainted with this incident, I had desired an
explanation of Mr Barton, who declared his intentions were honourable,
and expressed his hope that I would have no objections to his alliance;
that I had thanked him for the honour he intended our family; but told
him, it would be necessary to consult her uncle and aunt, who were
her guardians; and their approbation being obtained, I could have no
objection to his proposal; though I was persuaded that no violence would
be offered to my sister's inclinations, in a transaction that so nearly
interested the happiness of her future life: that he had assured me, he
should never think of availing himself of a guardian's authority, unless
he could render his addresses agreeable to the young lady herself; and
that he would immediately demand permission of Mr and Mrs Bramble, to
make Liddy a tender of his hand and fortune.

The squire was not insensible to the advantages of such a match, and
declared he would promote it with all his influence; but when I took
notice that there seemed to be an aversion on the side of Liddy, he said
he would sound her on the subject; and if her reluctance was such as
would not be easily overcome, he would civilly decline the proposal of
Mr Barton; for he thought that, in the choice of a husband a young woman
ought not to sacrifice the feelings of her heart for any consideration
upon earth--'Liddy is not so desperate (said he) as to worship fortune
at such an expence.'

I take it for granted, this whole affair will end in smoke; though there
seems to be a storm brewing in the quarter of Mrs Tabby, who sat with
all the sullen dignity of silence at dinner, seemingly pregnant with
complaint and expostulation. As she had certainly marked Barton for her
own prey, she cannot possibly favour his suit to Liddy; and therefore
I expect something extraordinary will attend his declaring himself my
sister's admirer. This declaration will certainly be made in form, as
soon as the lover can pick up resolution enough to stand the brunt
of Mrs Tabby's disappointment; for he is, without doubt, aware of her
designs upon his person--The particulars of the denouement you shall
know in due season: mean while I am

Always yours, J. MELFORD LONDON, June 10.




To Dr LEWIS.

DEAR LEWIS,

The deceitful calm was of short duration. I am plunged again in a sea of
vexation, and the complaints in my stomach and bowels are returned; so
that I suppose I shall be disabled from prosecuting the excursion I had
planned--What the devil had I to do, to come a plague hunting with a
leash of females in my train? Yesterday my precious sister (who, by
the bye, has been for some time a professed methodist) came into my
apartment, attended by Mr Barton, and desired an audience with a very
stately air--'Brother (said she), this gentleman has something to
propose, which I flatter myself will be the more acceptable, as it will
rid you of a troublesome companion.' Then Mr Barton proceeded to this
effect--'I am, indeed, extremely ambitious of being allied to your
family, Mr Bramble, and I hope you will see no cause to interpose your
authority.' 'As for authority (said Tabby, interrupting him with some
warmth), I know of none that he has a right to use on this occasion--If
I pay him the compliment of making him acquainted with the step I intend
to take, it is all he can expect in reason--This is as much as I
believe he would do by me, if he intended to change his own situation in
life--In a word, brother, I am so sensible of Mr Barton's extra ordinary
merit, that I have been prevailed upon to alter my resolution of living
a single life, and to put my happiness in his hands, by vesting him with
a legal title to my person and fortune, such as they are. The business
at present, is to have the writings drawn; and I shall be obliged to
you, if you will recommend a lawyer to me for that purpose'

You may guess what an effect this overture had upon me; who, from the
information of my nephew, expected that Barton was to make a formal
declaration of his passion for Liddy; I could not help gazing in silent
astonishment, alternately at Tabby, and her supposed admirer, who last
hung his head in the most aukward confusion for a few minutes, and then
retired on pretence of being suddenly seized with a vertigo--Mrs Tabitha
affected much concern, and would have had him make use of a bed in the
house; but he insisted upon going home, that he might have recourse
of some drops, which he kept for such emergencies, and his innamorata
acquiesced--In the mean time I was exceedingly puzzled at this adventure
(though I suspected the truth) and did not know in what manner to demean
myself towards Mrs Tabitha, when Jery came in and told me, he had just
seen Mr Barton alight from his chariot at lady Griskin's door--This
incident seemed to threaten a visit from her ladyship, with which we
were honoured accordingly, in less than half an hour--'I find (said she)
there has been a match of cross purposes among you good folks; and
I'm come to set you to rights'--So saying, she presented me with the
following billet

'DEAR SIR,

I no sooner recollected myself from the extreme confusion I was thrown
into, by that unlucky mistake of your sister, than I thought it my duty
to assure you, that my devoirs to Mrs Bramble never exceeded the bounds
of ordinary civility; and that my heart is unalterably fixed upon Miss
Liddy Melford, as I had the honour to declare to her brother, when he
questioned me upon that subject--Lady Griskin has been so good as to
charge herself, not only with the delivery of this note, but also with
the task of undeceiving Mrs Bramble, for whom I have the most profound
respect and veneration, though my affection being otherwise engaged is
no longer in the power of

Sir, Your very humble servant, RALPH BARTON.'

Having cast my eyes over this billet, I told her ladyship, that I would
no longer retard the friendly office she had undertaken: and I and
Jery forthwith retired into another room. There we soon perceived the
conversation grow very warm betwixt the two ladies; and, at length,
could distinctly hear certain terms of altercation, which we could no
longer delay interrupting, with any regard to decorum. When we entered
the scene of contention, we found Liddy had joined the disputants, and
stood trembling betwixt them, as if she had been afraid they would have
proceeded to something more practical than words. Lady Griskin's
face was like the full moon in a storm of wind, glaring, fiery,
and portentous; while Tabby looked grim and ghastly, with an aspect
breathing discord and dismay.--Our appearance put a stop to their mutual
revilings; but her ladyship turning to me, 'Cousin (said she) I can't
help saying I have met with a very ungrateful return from this lady, for
the pains I have taken to serve her family'--'My family is much obliged
to your ladyship (cried Tabby, with a kind of hysterical giggle); but
we have no right to the good offices of such an honourable go-between.'
'But, for all that, good Mrs Tabitha Bramble (resumed the other), I
shall be content with the reflection, That virtue is its own reward;
and it shall not be my fault, if you continue to make yourself
ridiculous--Mr Bramble, who has no little interest of his own to serve,
will, no doubt, contribute all in his power to promote a match
betwixt Mr Barton and his niece, which will be equally honourable and
advantageous; and, I dare say, Miss Liddy herself will have no objection
to a measure so well calculated to make her happy in life'--'I beg your
ladyship's pardon (exclaimed Liddy, with great vivacity) I have nothing
but misery to expect from such a measure; and I hope my guardians
will have too much compassion, to barter my peace of mind for any
consideration of interest or fortune'--'Upon my word, Miss Liddy! (said
she) you have profited by the example of your good aunt--I comprehend
your meaning, and will explain it when I have a proper opportunity--In
the mean time, I shall take my leave--Madam, your most obedient, and
devoted humble servant,' said she, advancing close up to my sister, and
curtsying so low, that I thought she intended to squat herself down on
the floor--This salutation Tabby returned with equal solemnity; and
the expression of the two faces, while they continued in this attitude,
would be no bad subject for a pencil like that of the incomparable
Hogarth, if any such should ever appear again, in these times of
dullness and degeneracy.

Jery accompanied her ladyship to her house, that he might have an
opportunity to restore the etuis to Barton, and advise him to give
up his suit, which was so disagreeable to his sister, against whom,
however, he returned much irritated--Lady Griskin had assured him that
Liddy's heart was pre-occupied; and immediately the idea of Wilson
recurring to his imagination, his family-pride took the alarm. He
denounced vengeance against the adventurer, and was disposed to be
very peremptory with his sister; but I desired he would suppress his
resentment, until I should have talked with her in private.

The poor girl, when I earnestly pressed her on this head, owned with
a flood of tears, that Wilson had actually come to the Hot Well at
Bristol, and even introduced himself into our lodgings as a Jew pedlar;
but that nothing had passed betwixt them, further than her begging him
to withdraw immediately, if he had any regard for her peace of mind:
that he had disappeared accordingly, after having attempted to prevail
upon my sister's maid, to deliver a letter; which, however, she refused
to receive, though she had consented to carry a message, importing that
he was a gentleman of a good family; and that, in a very little time, he
would avow his passion in that character--She confessed, that although
he had not kept his word in this particular, he was not yet altogether
indifferent to her affection; but solemnly promised, she would never
carry on any correspondence with him, or any other admirer, for the
future, without the privity and approbation of her brother and me.

By this declaration, she made her own peace with Jery; but the
hot-headed boy is more than ever incensed against Wilson, whom he now
considers as an impostor, that harbours some infamous design upon the
honour of his family--As for Barton he was not a little mortified to
find his present returned, and his addresses so unfavourably received;
but he is not a man to be deeply affected by such disappointments; and
I know not whether he is not as well pleased with being discarded
by Liddy, as he would have been with a permission to prosecute his
pretensions, at the risque of being every day exposed to the revenge or
machinations of Tabby, who is not to be slighted with impunity.--I
had not much time to moralize on these occurrences; for the house
was visited by a constable and his gang, with a warrant from Justice
Buzzard, to search the box of Humphry Clinker, my footman,--who was just
apprehended as a highwayman. This incident threw the whole family into
confusion. My sister scolded the constable for presuming to enter the
lodgings of a gentleman on such an errand, without having first asked,
and obtained permission; her maid was frightened into fits, and Liddy
shed tears of compassion for the unfortunate Clinker, in whose box,
however, nothing was found to confirm the suspicion of robbery.

For my own part, I made no doubt of the fellow's being mistaken for some
other person, and I went directly to the justice, in order to procure
his discharge; but there I found the matter much more serious than
I expected--Poor Clinker stood trembling at the bar, surrounded by
thief-takers; and at a little distance, a thick, squat fellow, a
postilion, his accuser, who had seized him on the street, and swore
positively to his person, that the said Clinker had, on the 15th day of
March last, on Blackheath, robbed a gentleman in a post-chaise, which
he (the postilion) drove--This deposition was sufficient to justify his
commitment; and he was sent accordingly to Clerkenwell prison, whither
Jery accompanied him in the coach, in order to recommend him properly to
the keeper, that he may want for no convenience which the place affords.

The spectators, who assembled to see this highwayman, were sagacious
enough to discern something very villainous in his aspect; which
(begging their pardon) is the very picture of simplicity; and the
justice himself put a very unfavourable construction upon some of his
answers, which, he said, savoured of the ambiguity and equivocation of
an old offender; but, in my opinion, it would have been more just and
humane to impute them to the confusion into which we may suppose a poor
country lad to be thrown on such an occasion. I am still persuaded he is
innocent; and, in this persuasion, I can do no less than use my utmost
endeavours that he may not be oppressed--I shall, to-morrow, send my
nephew to wait on the gentleman who was robbed, and beg; he will have
the humanity to go and see the prisoner; that, in case he should find
him quite different from the person of the highwayman, he may bear
testimony in his behalf--Howsoever it may fare with Clinker, this cursed
affair will be to me productive of intolerable chagrin--I have already
caught a dreadful cold, by rushing into the open air from the justice's
parlour, where I had been stewing in the crowd; and though I should not
be laid up with the gout, as I believe I shall, I must stay at London
for some weeks, till this poor devil comes to his trial at Rochester; so
that, in all probability, my northern expedition is blown up.

If you can find any thing in your philosophical budget, to console me
in the midst of these distresses and apprehensions, pray let it be
communicated to

Your unfortunate friend, MATT. BRAMBLE LONDON, June 12.




To Sir WATKIN PHILLIPS, of Jesus college, Oxon.

DEAR WAT,

The farce is finished, and another piece of a graver cast brought upon
the stage.--Our aunt made a desperate attack upon Barton, who had no
other way of saving himself, but by leaving her in possession of
the field, and avowing his pretensions to Liddy, by whom he has been
rejected in his turn.--Lady Griskin acted as his advocate and agent on
this occasion, with such zeal as embroiled her with Mrs Tabitha, and a
high scene of altercation passed betwixt these two religionists, which
might have come to action, had not my uncle interposed. They are however
reconciled, in consequence of an event which hath involved us all in
trouble and disquiet. You must know, the poor preacher, Humphry Clinker,
is now exercising his ministry among the felons in Clerkenwell prison--A
postilion having sworn a robbery against him, no bail could be taken,
and he was committed to jail, notwithstanding all the remonstrances and
interest my uncle could make in his behalf.

All things considered, the poor fellow cannot possibly be guilty,
and yet, I believe, he runs some risque of being hanged. Upon his
examination, he answered with such hesitation and reserve as persuaded
most of the people, who crowded the place, that he was really a knave,
and the justice's remarks confirmed their opinion. Exclusive of my uncle
and myself, there was only one person who seemed inclined to favour
the culprit.--He was a young man, well dressed, and, from the manner in
which he cross-examined the evidence, we took it for granted, that
he was a student in one of the inns of court.--He freely checked the
justice for some uncharitable inferences he made to the prejudice of
the prisoner, and even ventured to dispute with his worship on certain
points of law.

My uncle, provoked at the unconnected and dubious answers of Clinker,
who seemed in danger of falling a sacrifice to his own simplicity,
exclaimed, 'In the name of God, if you are innocent, say so.' 'No (cried
he) God forbid that I should call myself innocent, while my conscience
is burthened with sin.' 'What then, you did commit this robbery?'
resumed his master. 'No, sure (said he) blessed be the Lord, I'm free of
that guilt.'

Here the justice interposed, observing, that the man seemed inclined to
make a discovery by turning king's evidence, and desired the clerk to
take his confession; upon which Humphry declared, that he looked upon
confession to be a popish fraud, invented by the whore of Babylon. The
Templar affirmed, that the poor fellow was non compos; and exhorted the
justice to discharge him as a lunatic.--'You know very well (added he)
that the robbery in question was not committed by the prisoner.'

The thief-takers grinned at one another; and Mr Justice Buzzard
replied with great emotion, 'Mr Martin, I desire you will mind your
own business; I shall convince you one of these days that I understand
mine.' In short, there was no remedy; the mittimus was made out,
and poor Clinker sent to prison in a hackney-coach, guarded by the
constable, and accompanied by your humble servant. By the way, I was not
a little surprised to hear this retainer to justice bid the prisoner to
keep up his spirits, for that he did not at all doubt but that he would
get off for a few weeks confinement--He said, his worship knew very well
that Clinker was innocent of the fact, and that the real highwayman who
robbed the chaise, was no other than that very individual Mr Martin, who
had pleaded so strenuously for honest Humphry.

Confounded at this information, I asked, 'Why then is he suffered to
go about at his liberty, and this poor innocent fellow treated as a
malefactor?' 'We have exact intelligence of all Mr Martin's transactions
(said he); but as yet there is not evidence sufficient for his
conviction; and as for this young man, the justice could do no less than
commit him, as the postilion swore point-blank to his identity.' 'So
if this rascally postilion should persist in the falsity to which he is
sworn (said I), this innocent lad may be brought to the gallows.'

The constable observed, that he would have time enough to prepare
for his trial, and might prove an alibi; or, perhaps, Martin might be
apprehended and convicted for another fact; in which case, he might be
prevailed upon to take this affair upon himself; or, finally, if these
chances should fail, and the evidence stand good against Clinker,
the jury might recommend him to mercy, in consideration of his youth,
especially if this should appear to be the first fact of which he had
been guilty.

Humphry owned he could not pretend to recollect where he had been on the
day when the robbery was committed, much less prove a circumstance of
that kind so far back as six months, though he knew he had been sick
of the fever and ague, which, however, did not prevent him from going
about--then, turning up his eyes, he ejaculated, 'The Lord's will be
done! if it be my fate to suffer, I hope I shall not disgrace the faith
of which, though unworthy, I make profession.'

When I expressed my surprize that the accuser should persist in charging
Clinker, without taking the least notice of the real robber who
stood before him, and to whom, indeed, Humphry bore not the smallest
resemblance; the constable (who was himself a thief-taker) gave me to
understand, that Mr Martin was the best qualified for business of all
the gentlemen on the road he had ever known; that he had always acted on
his own bottom, without partner or correspondent, and never went to work
but when he was cool and sober; that his courage and presence of mind
never failed him; that his address was genteel, and his behaviour void
of all cruelty and insolence; that he never encumbered himself with
watches or trinkets, nor even with bank-notes, but always dealt for
ready money, and that in the current coin of the kingdom; and that he
could disguise himself and his horse in such a manner, that, after
the action, it was impossible to recognize either the one or the
other--'This great man (said he) has reigned paramount in all the roads
within fifty miles of London above fifteen months, and has done more
business in that time, than all the rest of the profession put together;
for those who pass through his hands are so delicately dealt with, that
they have no desire to give him the least disturbance; but for all that,
his race is almost run--he is now fluttering about justice, like a moth
about a candle--there are so many lime-twigs laid in his way, that I'll
bet a cool hundred, he swings before Christmas.'

Shall I own to you, that this portrait, drawn by a ruffian, heightened
by what I myself had observed in his deportment, has interested me
warmly in the fate of poor Martin, whom nature seems to have intended
for a useful and honourable member of that community upon which he now
preys for subsistence? It seems, he lived some time as a clerk to a
timber-merchant, whose daughter Martin having privately married, was
discarded, and his wife turned out of doors. She did not long survive
her marriage; and Martin, turning fortune-hunter, could not supply his
occasions any other way, than by taking to the road, in which he
has travelled hitherto with uncommon success.--He pays his respects
regularly to Mr Justice Buzzard, the thief-catcher-general of this
metropolis, and sometimes they smoke a pipe together very lovingly,
when the conversation generally turns upon the nature of evidence.--The
justice has given him fair warning to take care of himself, and he has
received his caution in good part.--Hitherto he has baffled all the
vigilance, art, and activity of Buzzard and his emissaries, with
such conduct as would have done honour to the genius of a Caesar or
a Turenne; but he has one weakness, which has proved fatal to all the
heroes of his tribe, namely, an indiscreet devotion to the fair sex, and
in all probability, he will be attacked on this defenceless quarter.

Be that as it may, I saw the body of poor Clinker consigned to the
gaoler of Clerkenwell, to whose indulgence I recommended him so
effectually, that he received him in the most hospitable manner, though
there was a necessity for equipping him with a suit of irons, in which
he made a very rueful appearance. The poor creature seemed as much
affected by my uncle's kindness, as by his own misfortune. When I
assured him, that nothing should be left undone for procuring his
enlargement, and making his confinement easy in the mean time, he fell
down on his knees, and kissing my hand, which he bathed with his tears,
'0 'squire! (cried he, sobbing) what shall I say?--I can't--no, I can't
speak--my poor heart is bursting with gratitude to you and my dear--dear
generous--noble benefactor.'

I protest, the scene became so pathetic, that I was fain to force myself
away, and returned to my uncle, who sent me in the afternoon with
a compliment to one Mr Mead, the person who had been robbed on
Black-heath. As I did not find him at home, I left a message, in
consequence of which he called at our lodgings this morning, and very
humanely agreed to visit the prisoner. By this time, lady Griskin had
come to make her formal compliments of condolance to Mrs Tabitha, on
this domestic calamity; and that prudent maiden, whose passion was
now cooled, thought proper to receive her ladyship so civilly, that a
reconciliation immediately ensued. These two ladies resolved to comfort
the poor prisoner in their own persons, and Mr Mead and I 'squired
them to Clerkenwell, my uncle being detained at home by some slight
complaints in his stomach and bowels.

The turnkey, who received us at Clerkenwell, looked remarkably sullen;
and when we enquired for Clinker, 'I don't care, if the devil had him
(said he); here has been nothing but canting and praying since the
fellow entered the place.--Rabbit him! the tap will be ruined--we han't
sold a cask of beer, nor a dozen of wine, since he paid his garnish--the
gentlemen get drunk with nothing but your damned religion.--For my part,
I believe as how your man deals with the devil.--Two or three as bold
hearts as ever took the air upon Hounslow have been blubbering all
night; and if the fellow an't speedily removed by Habeas Corpus, or
otherwise, I'll be damn'd if there's a grain of true spirit left within
these walls we shan't have a soul to do credit to the place, or make his
exit like a true born Englishman--damn my eyes! there will be nothing
but snivelling in the cart--we shall all die like so many psalm-singing
weavers.'

In short, we found that Humphry was, at that very instant, haranguing
the felons in the chapel; and that the gaoler's wife and daughter,
together with my aunt's woman, Win Jenkins, and our house-maid, were
among the audience, which we immediately joined. I never saw any thing
so strongly picturesque as this congregation of felons clanking their
chains, in the midst of whom stood orator Clinker, expatiating in a
transport of fervor, on the torments of hell, denounced in scripture
against evil-doers, comprehending murderers, robbers, thieves, and
whore mongers. The variety of attention exhibited in the faces of those
ragamuffins, formed a groupe that would not have disgraced the pencil of
a Raphael. In one, it denoted admiration; in another, doubt; in a
third, disdain; in a fourth, contempt; in a fifth, terror; in a sixth,
derision; and in a seventh, indignation.--As for Mrs Winifred Jenkins,
she was in tears, overwhelmed with sorrow; but whether for her own sins,
or the misfortune of Clinker, I cannot pretend to say. The other females
seemed to listen with a mixture of wonder and devotion. The gaoler's
wife declared he was a saint in trouble, saying, she wished from her
heart there was such another good soul, like him, in every gaol in
England.

Mr Mead, having earnestly surveyed the preacher, declared his appearance
was so different from that of the person who robbed him on Black-heath,
that he could freely make oath he was not the man: but Humphry himself
was by this time pretty well rid of all apprehensions of being hanged;
for he had been the night before solemnly tried and acquitted by his
fellow prisoners, some of whom he had already converted to methodism.
He now made proper acknowledgments for the honour of our visit, and was
permitted to kiss the hands of the ladies, who assured him, he might
depend upon their friendship and protection. Lady Griskin, in her
great zeal, exhorted his fellow-prisoners to profit by the precious
opportunity of having such a saint in bonds among them, and turn over a
new leaf for the benefit of their poor souls; and, that her admonition
might have the greater effect, she reinforced it with her bounty.

While she and Mrs Tabby returned in the coach with the two maidservants,
I waited on Mr Mead to the house of justice Buzzard, who, having heard
his declaration, said his oath could be of no use at present, but that
he would be a material evidence for the prisoner at his trial; so that
there seems to be no remedy but patience for poor Clinker; and, indeed,
the same virtue, or medicine, will be necessary for us all, the
squire in particular, who had set his heart upon his excursion to the
northward.

While we were visiting honest Humphry in Clerkenwell prison, my uncle
received a much more extraordinary visit at his own lodgings. Mr Martin,
of whom I have made such honourable mention, desired permission to pay
him his respects, and was admitted accordingly. He told him, that
having observed him, at Mr Buzzard's, a good deal disturbed by what had
happened to his servant, he had come to assure him he had nothing to
apprehend for Clinker's life; for, if it was possible that any jury
could find him guilty upon such evidence, he, Martin himself, would
produce in court a person, whose deposition would bring him off clear as
the sun at noon.--Sure, the fellow would not be so romantic as to
take the robbery upon himself!--He said, the postilion was an infamous
fellow, who had been a dabbler in the same profession, and saved his
life at the Old Bailey by impeaching his companions; that being now
reduced to great poverty, he had made this desperate push, to swear
away the life of an innocent man, in hopes of having the reward upon his
conviction; but that he would find himself miserably disappointed, for
the justice and his myrmidons were determined to admit of no interloper
in this branch of business; and that he did not at all doubt but that
they would find matter enough to shop the evidence himself before the
next gaol-delivery. He affirmed, that all these circumstances were well
known to the justice; and that his severity to Clinker was no other
than a hint to his master to make him a present in private, as an
acknowledgment of his candour and humanity.

This hint, however, was so unpalatable to Mr Bramble, that he declared,
with great warmth, he would rather confine himself for life to
London, which he detested, than be at liberty to leave it tomorrow, in
consequence of encouraging corruption in a magistrate. Hearing, however,
how favourable Mr Mead's report had been for the prisoner, he is
resolved to take the advice of counsel in what manner to proceed for his
immediate enlargement. I make no doubt, but that in a day or two this
troublesome business may be discussed; and in this hope we are preparing
for our journey. If our endeavours do not miscarry, we shall have taken
the field before you hear again from

Yours, J. MELFORD LONDON, June 11




To Dr LEWIS.

Thank Heaven! dear Lewis, the clouds are dispersed, and I have now the
clearest prospect of my summer campaign, which, I hope, I shall be able
to begin to-morrow. I took the advice of counsel with respect to the
case of Clinker, in whose favour a lucky incident has intervened.
The fellow who accused him, has had his own battery turned upon
himself.--Two days ago he was apprehended for a robbery on the highway,
and committed, on the evidence of an accomplice. Clinker, having moved
for a writ of habeas corpus, was brought before the lord chief justice,
who, in consequence of an affidavit of the gentleman who had been
robbed, importing that the said Clinker was not the person who stopped
him on the highway, as well as in consideration of the postilion's
character and present circumstances, was pleased to order, that
my servant should be admitted to bail, and he has been discharged
accordingly, to the unspeakable satisfaction of our whole family, to
which he has recommended himself in an extraordinary manner, not only by
his obliging deportment, but by his talents of preaching, praying, and
singing psalms, which he has exercised with such effect, that even Tabby
respects him as a chosen vessel. If there was any thing like affectation
or hypocrisy in this excess of religion, I would not keep him in
my service, but, so far as I can observe, the fellow's character is
downright simplicity, warmed with a kind of enthusiasm, which renders
him very susceptible of gratitude and attachment to his benefactors.

As he is an excellent horseman, and understands farriery, I have bought
a stout gelding for his use, that he may attend us on the road, and have
an eye to our cattle, in case the coachman should not mind his business.
My nephew, who is to ride his own saddle-horse, has taken, upon trial,
a servant just come from abroad with his former master, Sir William
Strollop, who vouches for his honesty. The fellow, whose name is Dutton,
seems to be a petit maitre.--He has got a smattering of French, bows,
and grins, and shrugs, and takes snuff a la mode de France, but values
himself chiefly upon his skill and dexterity in hair-dressing.--If I
am not much deceived by appearance, he is, in all respects, the very
contrast of Humphry Clinker.

My sister has made up matters with lady Griskin; though, I must own, I
should not have been sorry to see that connexion entirely destroyed: but
Tabby is not of a disposition to forgive Barton, who, I understand,
is gone to his seat in Berkshire for the summer season. I cannot help
suspecting, that in the treaty of peace, which has been lately ratified
betwixt those two females, it is stipulated, that her ladyship shall
use her best endeavours to provide an agreeable help-mate for our sister
Tabitha, who seems to be quite desperate in her matrimonial designs.
Perhaps, the match-maker is to have a valuable consideration in the way
of brokerage, which she will most certainly deserve, if she can find
any man in his senses, who will yoke with Mrs Bramble from motives of
affection or interest.

I find my spirits and my health affect each other reciprocally that is
to say, every thing that discomposes my mind, produces a correspondent
disorder in my body; and my bodily complaints are remarkably
mitigated by those considerations that dissipate the clouds of mental
chagrin.--The imprisonment of Clinker brought on those symptoms which
I mentioned in my last, and now they are vanished at his discharge.--It
must be owned, indeed, I took some of the tincture of ginseng, prepared
according to your prescription, and found it exceedingly grateful to
the stomach; but the pain and sickness continued to return, after short
intervals, till the anxiety of my mind was entirely removed, and then I
found myself perfectly at case. We have had fair weather these ten days,
to the astonishment of the Londoners, who think it portentous. If you
enjoy the same indulgence in Wales, I hope Barns has got my hay made,
and safe cocked by this time. As we shall be in motion for some weeks,
I cannot expect to hear from you as usual; but I shall continue to write
from every place at which we make any halt, that you may know our track,
in case it should be necessary to communicate any thing to

Your assured friend, MATT. BRAMBLE LONDON, June 14.




To Mrs MARY JONES, at Brambleton-hall, &c.

DEAR MARY,

Having the occasion of my cousin Jenkins of Aberga'ny, I send you, as
a token, a turkey-shell comb, a kiple of yards of green ribbon, and a
sarment upon the nothingness of good works, which was preached in the
Tabernacle; and you will also receive a horn-buck for Saul, whereby she
may learn her letters; for Fin much consarned about the state of her
poor sole--and what are all the pursuits of this life to the consarns of
that immortal part?--What is life but a veil of affliction? O Mary! the
whole family have been in such a constipation!--Mr Clinker has been in
trouble, but the gates of hell have not been able to prevail again him.
His virtue is like poor gould, seven times tried in the fire. He was
tuck up for a rubbery, and had before gustass Busshard, who made his
mittamouse; and the pore youth was sent to prison upon the false oaf of
a willian, that wanted to sware his life away for the looker of cain.

The 'squire did all in his power, but could not prevent his being put
in chains, and confined among common manufactors, where he stood like
an innocent sheep in the midst of wolves and tygers.--Lord knows what
mought have happened to this pyehouse young man, if master had not
applied to Apias Korkus, who lives with the ould bailiff, and is, they
say, five hundred years old (God bless us!), and a congeror: but, if he
be, sure I am he don't deal with the devil, otherwise he couldn't have
fought out Mr Clinker, as he did, in spite of stone walls, iron bolts,
and double locks, that flew open at his command; for ould Scratch has
not a greater enemy upon hearth than Mr Clinker, who is, indeed, a very
powerful labourer in the Lord's vineyard. I do no more than yuse the
words of my good lady, who has got the infectual calling; and, I
trust, that even myself, though unworthy, shall find grease to be
excepted.--Miss Liddy has been touch'd to the quick, but is a little
timorsome: howsomever, I make no doubt, but she, and all of us, will be
brought, by the endeavours of Mr Clinker, to produce blessed fruit of
generation and repentance.--As for master and the young 'squire, they
have as yet had narro glimpse of the new light.--I doubt as how their
harts are hardened by worldly wisdom, which, as the pyebill saith, is
foolishness in the sight of God.

O Mary Jones, pray without seizing for grease to prepare you for
the operations of this wonderful instrument, which, I hope, will
be exorcised this winter upon you and others at Brambleton-hall.--
Tomorrow, we are to set out in a cox and four for Yorkshire; and, I
believe, we shall travel that way far, and far, and farther than I can
tell; but I shan't go so far as to forget my friends; and Mary Jones
will always be remembered as one of them by her


Humble sarvant, WIN. JENKINS LONDON, June 14.




To Mrs GWYLLIM, house-keeper at Brambleton-hall. MRS GWYLLIM,

I can't help thinking it very strange, that I never had an answer to the
letter I wrote you some weeks ago from Bath, concerning the sour bear,
the gander, and the maids eating butter, which I won't allow to be
wasted.--We are now going upon a long journey to the north, whereby I
desire you will redouble your care and circumflexion, that the family
may be well managed in our absence; for, you know, you must render
account, not only to your earthly master, but also to him that is above;
and if you are found a good and faithful sarvant, great will be your
reward in haven. I hope there will be twenty stun of cheese ready for
market--by the time I get huom, and as much owl spun, as will make half
a dozen pair of blankets; and that the savings of the butter-milk will
fetch me a good penny before Martinmass, as the two pigs are to be fed
for baking with bitchmast and acrons.

I wrote to doctor Lews for the same porpuss, but he never had the good
manners to take the least notice of my letter; for which reason, I shall
never favour him with another, though he beshits me on his bended knees.
You will do well to keep a watchful eye over the hind Villiams, who is
one of his amissories, and, I believe, no better than he should be at
bottom. God forbid that I should lack christian charity; but charity
begins at huom, and sure nothing can be a more charitable work than to
rid the family of such vermine. I do suppose, that the bindled cow has
been had to the parson's bull, that old Moll has had another litter of
pigs, and that Dick is become a mighty mouser. Pray order every thing
for the best, and be frugal, and keep the maids to their labour--If I
had a private opportunity, I would send them some hymns to sing instead
of profane ballads; but, as I can't, they and you must be contented with
the prayers of


Your assured friend, T. BRAMBLE LONDON, June 14.




To Sir WATKIN PHILLIPS, Bart. of Jesus college, Oxon.

DEAR PHILLIPS,

The very day after I wrote my last, Clinker was set at liberty. As
Martin had foretold, the accuser was himself committed for a robbery,
upon unquestionable evidence. He had been for some time in the snares of
the thief-taking society; who, resenting his presumption in attempting
to incroach upon their monopoly of impeachment, had him taken up and
committed to Newgate, on the deposition of an accomplice, who has been
admitted as evidence for the king. The postilion being upon record as an
old offender, the chief justice made no scruple of admitting Clinker to
bail, when he perused the affidavit of Mr Mead, importing that the said
Clinker was not the person that robbed him on Blackheath; and honest
Humphry was discharged. When he came home, he expressed great eagerness
to pay his respects to his master, and here his elocution failed him,
but his silence was pathetic; he fell down at his feet and embraced his
knees, shedding a flood of tears, which my uncle did not see without
emotion. He took snuff in some confusion; and, putting his hand in
his pocket, gave him his blessing in something more substantial than
words--'Clinker (said he), I am so well convinced, both of your honesty
and courage, that I am resolved to make you my life-guardman on the
highway.'

He was accordingly provided with a case of pistols, and a carbine to be
flung a-cross his shoulders; and every other preparation being made, we
set out last Thursday, at seven in the morning; my uncle, with the three
women in the coach; Humphry, well mounted on a black gelding bought for
his use; myself a-horseback, attended by my new valet, Mr Dutton,
an exceeding coxcomb, fresh from his travels, whom I have taken upon
trial--The fellow wears a solitaire, uses paint, and takes rappee with
all the grimace of a French marquis. At present, however, he is in a
ridingdress, jack-boots, leather breeches, a scarlet waistcoat, with
gold binding, a laced hat, a hanger, a French posting-whip in his hand,
and his hair en queue.

Before we had gone nine miles, my horse lost one of his shoes; so that I
was obliged to stop at Barnet to have another, while the coach proceeded
at an easy pace over the common. About a mile short of Hatfield, the
postilions, stopping the carriage, gave notice to Clinker that there
were two suspicious fellows a-horseback, at the end of a lane, who
semed waiting to attack the coach. Humphry forthwith apprised my uncle,
declaring he would stand by him to the last drop of his blood; and
unflinging his carbine, prepared for action. The 'squire had pistols in
the pockets of the coach, and resolved to make use of them directly;
but he was effectually prevented by his female companions, who flung
themselves about his neck, and screamed in concert--At that instant,
who should come up at a hand-gallop, but Martin, the highway-man, who,
advancing to the coach, begged the ladies would compose themselves for
a moment then, desiring Clinker to follow him to the charge, he pulled a
pistol out of his bosom, and they rode up together to give battle to the
rogues, who, having fired at a great distance, fled across the common.
They were in pursuit of the fugitives when I came up, not a little
alarmed at the shrieks in the coach, where I found my uncle in a violent
rage, without his periwig, struggling to disentangle himself from Tabby
and the other two, and swearing with great vociferation. Before I had
time to interpose, Martin and Clinker returned from the pursuit, and
the former payed his compliments with great politeness, giving us to
understand, that the fellows had scampered off, and that he believed
they were a couple of raw 'prentices from London. He commended Clinker
for his courage, and said, if we would give him leave, he would have the
honour to accompany us as far as Stevenage, where he had some business.

The 'squire, having recollected and adjusted himself, was the first
to laugh at his own situation: but it was not without difficulty, that
Tabby's arms could be untwisted from his neck; Liddy's teeth chattered,
and Jenkins was threatened with a fit as usual. I had communicated to my
uncle the character of Martin, as it was described by the constable, and
he was much struck with its singularity--He could not suppose the fellow
had any design on our company, which was so numerous and well armed; he
therefore thanked him, for the service he had just done them, said he
would be glad of his company, and asked him to dine with us at Hatfield.
This invitation might not have been agreeable to the ladies, had they
known the real profession of our guest, but this was a secret to all,
except my uncle and myself. Mrs Tabitha, however, would by no means
consent to proceed with a case of loaded pistols in the coach, and they
were forthwith discharged in complaisance to her and the rest of the
women.

Being gratified in this particular, she became remarkably goodhumoured,
and at dinner behaved in the most affable manner to Mr Martin, with
whose polite address and agreeable conversation she seemed to be much
taken. After dinner, the landlord accosting me in the yard, asked with a
significant look, if the gentleman that rode the sorrel belonged to our
company?--I understand his meaning, but answered no; that he had come
up with us on the common, and helped us to drive away two fellows, that
looked like highwaymen--He nodded three times distinctly, as much as to
say, he knows his cue. Then he inquired, if one of those men was mounted
on a bay mare, and the other on a chestnut gelding with a white streak
down his forehead? and being answered in the affirmative, he assured me
they had robbed three post-chaises this very morning--I inquired, in my
turn, if Mr Martin was of his acquaintance; and, nodding thrice again,
he answered, that he had seen the gentleman.

Before we left Hatfield, my uncle, fixing his eyes on Martin with such
expression as is more easily conceived than described, asked, if he
often travelled that road? and he replied with a look which denoted his
understanding the question, that he very seldom did business in that
part of the country. In a word, this adventurer favoured us with his
company to the neighbourhood of Stevenage, where he took his leave of
the coach and me, in very polite terms, and turned off upon a crossroad,
that led to a village on the left--At supper, Mrs Tabby was very full
in the praise of Mr Martin's good-sense and good-breeding, and seemed
to regret that she had not a further opportunity to make some experiment
upon his affection. In the morning, my uncle was not a little surprised
to receive, from the waiter a billet couched in these words--


'SIR,

I could easily perceive from your looks, when I had the honour to
converse with you at Hatfield, that my character is not unknown to you;
and, I dare say you won't think it strange, that I should be glad to
change my present way of life, for any other honest occupation, let it
be ever so humble, that will afford me bread in moderation, and sleep
in safety--Perhaps you may think I flatter, when I say, that from the
moment I was witness to your generous concern in the cause of your
servant, I conceived a particular esteem and veneration for your person;
and yet what I say is true. I should think myself happy, if I could
be admitted into your protection and service, as house-steward, clerk,
butler, or bailiff, for either of which places I think myself tolerably
well qualified; and, sure I am, I should not be found deficient in
gratitude and fidelity--At the same time, I am very sensible how much
you must deviate from the common maxims of discretion, even in putting
my professions to the trial; but I don't look upon you as a person that
thinks in the ordinary stile; and the delicacy of my situation, will,
I know, justify this address to a heart warmed with beneficence and
compassion--Understanding you are going pretty far north, I shall take
an opportunity to throw myself in your way again, before you reach the
borders of Scotland; and, I hope, by that time, you will have taken into
consideration, the truly distressful case of,

honoured sir, your very humble, and devoted servant, EDWARD MARTIN'

The 'squire, having perused this letter, put it into my hand, without
saying a syllable; and when I had read it we looked at each other in
silence. From a certain sparkling in his eyes, I discovered there was
more in his heart, than he cared to express with his tongue, in favour
of poor Martin; and this was precisely my own feeling, which he did not
fail to discern, by the same means of communication--'What shall we
do (said he) to save this poor sinner from the gallows, and make him
a useful member of the commonwealth; and yet the proverb says, Save a
thief from the gallows, and he'll cut your throat.' I told him I really
believed Martin was capable of giving the proverb the lie; and that
I should heartily concur in any step he might take in favour of his
solicitation. We mutually resolved to deliberate upon the subject,
and, in the mean time, proceeded on our journey. The roads, having been
broken up by the heavy rains in the spring, were so rough, that although
we travelled very slowly, the jolting occasioned such pain, to my uncle,
that he was become exceedingly peevish when we arrived at this place,
which lies about eight miles from the postroad, between Wetherby and
Boroughbridge.

Harrigate-water, so celebrated for its efficacy in the scurvy and other
distempers, is supplied from a copious spring, in the hollow of a
wild common, round which, a good many houses have been built for the
convenience of the drinkers, though few of them are inhabited. Most of
the company lodge at some distance, in five separate inns, situated in
different parts of the commons, from whence they go every morning to the
well, in their own carriages. The lodgers of each inn form a distinct
society, that eat together; and there is a commodious public room, where
they breakfast in disabille, at separate tables, from eight o'clock till
eleven, as they chance or chuse to come in--Here also they drink tea in
the afternoon, and play at cards or dance in the evening. One custom,
however, prevails, which I looked upon as a solecism in politeness. The
ladies treat with tea in their turns; and even girls of sixteen are
not exempted from this shameful imposition--There is a public ball by
subscription every night at one of the houses, to which all the company
from the others are admitted by tickets; and, indeed, Harrigate treads
upon the heels of Bath, in the articles of gaiety and dissipation--with
this difference, however, that here we are more sociable and familiar.
One of the inns is already full up to the very garrets, having no less
than fifty lodgers, and as many servants. Our family does not exceed
thirty-six; and I should be sorry to see the number augmented, as our
accommodations won't admit of much increase.

At present, the company is more agreeable than one could expect from
an accidental assemblage of persons, who are utter strangers to one
another--There seems to be a general disposition among us to maintain
good-fellowship, and promote the purposes of humanity, in favour of
those who come hither on the score of health. I see several faces which
we left at Bath, although the majority are of the Northern counties,
and many come from Scotland for the benefit of these waters--In such a
variety, there must be some originals, among whom Mrs Tabitha Bramble is
not the most inconsiderable--No place where there is such an intercourse
between the sexes, can be disagreeable to a lady of her views and
temperament--She has had some warm disputes at table, with a lame parson
from Northumberland, on the new birth, and the insignificance of moral
virtue; and her arguments have been reinforced by an old Scotch lawyer,
in a rye periwig, who, though he has lost his teeth, and the use of his
limbs, can still wag his tongue with great volubility. He has paid her
such fulsome compliments, upon her piety and learning, as seem to have
won her heart; and she, in her turn, treats him with such attention as
indicates a design upon his person; but, by all accounts, he is too
much of a fox to be inveigled into any snare that she can lay for his
affection.

We do not propose to stay long at Harrigate, though, at present, it is
our headquarters, from whence we shall make some excursions, to
visit two or three of our rich relations, who are settled in this
country.--Pray, remember me to all our friends of Jesus, and allow me to
be still

Yours affectionately, J. MELFORD HARRIGATE, June 23.




To Dr LEWIS.

DEAR DOCTOR,

Considering the tax we pay for turnpikes, the roads of this county
constitute a most intolerable grievance. Between Newark and Weatherby,
I have suffered more from jolting and swinging than ever I felt in the
whole course of my life, although the carriage is remarkably commodious
and well hung, and the postilions were very careful in driving. I am now
safely housed at the New Inn, at Harrigate, whither I came to satisfy
my curiosity, rather than with any view of advantage to my health; and,
truly, after having considered all the parts and particulars of the
place, I cannot account for the concourse of people one finds here, upon
any other principle but that of caprice, which seems to be the character
of our nation.

Harrigate is a wild common, bare and bleak, without tree or shrub, or
the least signs of cultivation; and the people who come to drink the
water, are crowded together in paltry inns, where the few tolerable
rooms are monopolized by the friends and favourites of the house, and
all the rest of the lodgers are obliged to put up with dirty holes,
where there is neither space, air, nor convenience. My apartment is
about ten feet square; and when the folding bed is down, there is just
room sufficient to pass between it and the fire. One might expect,
indeed, that there would be no occasion for a fire at Midsummer; but
here the climate is so backward, that an ash tree, which our landlord
has planted before my window, is just beginning to put forth its leaves;
and I am fain to have my bed warmed every night.

As for the water, which is said to have effected so many surprising
cures, I have drank it once, and the first draught has cured me of all
desire to repeat the medicine.--Some people say it smells of rotten
eggs, and others compare it to the scourings of a foul gun.--It is
generally supposed to be strongly impregnated with sulphur; and Dr Shaw,
in his book upon mineral water, says, he has seen flakes of sulphur
floating in the well--Pace tanti viri; I, for my part, have never
observed any thing like sulphur, either in or about the well, neither do
I find that any brimstone has ever been extracted from the water. As
for the smell, if I may be allowed to judge from my own organs, it is
exactly that of bilge-water; and the saline taste of it seems to declare
that it is nothing else than salt water putrified in the bowels of the
earth. I was obliged to hold my nose with one hand, while I advanced the
glass to my mouth with the other; and after I had made shift to swallow
it, my stomach could hardly retain what it had received.--The only
effects it produced were sickness, griping, and insurmountable
disgust.--I can hardly mention it without puking.--The world is
strangely misled by the affectation of singularity. I cannot help
suspecting, that this water owes its reputation in a great measure
to its being so strikingly offensive.--On the same kind of analogy, a
German doctor has introduced hemlock and other poisons, as specifics,
into the materia medica.--I am persuaded, that all the cures ascribed
to the Harrigate water, would have been as efficaciously, and infinitely
more agreeably performed, by the internal and external use of seawater.
Sure I am, this last is much less nauseous to the taste and smell, and
much more gentle in its operation as a purge, as well as more extensive
in its medical qualities.

Two days ago we went across the country to visit 'squire Burdock, who
married a first cousin of my father, an heiress, who brought him an
estate of a thousand a-year. This gentleman is a declared opponent
of the ministry in parliament; and having an opulent fortune, piques
himself upon living in the country, and maintaining old English
hospitality--By the bye, this is a phrase very much used by the English
themselves both in words and writing; but I never heard of it out of the
island, except by way of irony and sarcasm. What the hospitality of our
forefathers has been I should be glad to see recorded, rather in the
memoirs of strangers who have visited our country, and were the proper
objects and judges of such hospitality, than in the discourse and
lucubrations of the modern English, who seem to describe it from
theory and conjecture. Certain it is, we are generally looked upon by
foreigners, as a people totally destitute of this virtue; and I
never was in any country abroad, where I did not meet with persons of
distinction, who complained of having been inhospitably used in Great
Britain. A gentleman of France, Italy, or Germany, who has entertained
and lodged an Englishman at his house, when he afterwards meets with
his guest at London, is asked to dinner at the Saracen's-head, the
Turk's-head, the Boar's-head, or the Bear, eats raw beef and butter,
drinks execrable port, and is allowed to pay his share of the reckoning.

But to return from this digression, which my feeling for the honour of
my country obliged me to make--our Yorkshire cousin has been a mighty
fox-hunter before the Lord; but now he is too fat and unwieldy to leap
ditches and five-bar gates; nevertheless, he still keeps a pack
of hounds, which are well exercised; and his huntsman every night
entertains him with the adventures of the day's chace, which he recites
in a tone and terms that are extremely curious and significant. In the
mean time, his broad brawn is scratched by one of his grooms.--This
fellow, it seems, having no inclination to curry any beast out of the
stable, was at great pains to scollop his nails in such a manner that
the blood followed at every stroke.--He was in hopes that he would
be dismissed from this disagreeable office, but the event turned out
contrary to his expectation.--His master declared he was the best
scratcher in the family; and now he will not suffer any other servant to
draw a nail upon his carcase.

The 'squire's lady is very proud, without being stiff or inaccessible.
She receives even her inferiors in point of fortune with a kind of
arrogant civility; but then she thinks she has a right to treat them
with the most ungracious freedoms of speech, and never fails to let
them know she is sensible of her own superior affluence. In a word,
she speaks well of no living soul, and has not one single friend in
the world. Her husband hates her mortally; but, although the brute is
sometimes so very powerful in him that he will have his own way, he
generally truckles to her dominion, and dreads, like a school-boy, the
lash of her tongue. On the other hand, she is afraid of provoking him
too far, lest he should make some desperate effort to shake off her
yoke.--She, therefore, acquiesces in the proofs he daily gives of his
attachment to the liberty of an English freeholder, by saying and doing,
at his own table, whatever gratifies the brutality of his disposition,
or contributes to the case of his person. The house, though large, is
neither elegant nor comfortable.--It looks like a great inn, crowded
with travellers, who dine at the landlord's ordinary, where there is
a great profusion of victuals and drink, but mine host seems to be
misplaced; and I would rather dine upon filberts with a hermit, than
feed upon venison with a hog. The footmen might be aptly compared to the
waiters of a tavern, if they were more serviceable and less rapacious;
but they are generally insolent and inattentive, and so greedy, that, I
think, I can dine better, and for less expence, at the Star and Garter
in Pall mall, than at our cousin's castle in Yorkshire. The 'squire is
not only accommodated with a wife, but he is also blessed with an only
son, about two and twenty, just returned from Italy, a complete fidler
and dillettante; and he slips no opportunity of manifesting the most
perfect contempt for his own father.

When we arrived, there was a family of foreigners at the house, on a
visit to this virtuoso, with whom they had been acquainted at the Spa;
it was the count de Melville, with his lady, on their way to Scotland.
Mr Burdock had met with an accident, in consequence of which both the
count and I would have retired but the young gentleman and his mother
insisted upon our staying dinner; and their serenity seemed to be
so little ruffled by what had happened, that we complied with their
invitation. The 'squire had been brought home over night in his
post-chaise, so terribly belaboured about the pate, that he seemed to
be in a state of stupefaction, and had ever since remained speechless. A
country apothecary, called Grieve, who lived in a neighbouring village,
having been called to his assistance, had let him blood, and applied a
poultice to his head, declaring, that he had no fever, nor any other bad
symptom but the loss of speech, if he really had lost that faculty.
But the young 'squire said this practitioner was an ignorantaccio, that
there was a fracture in the cranium, and that there was a necessity for
having him trepanned without loss of time. His mother, espousing this
opinion, had sent an express to York for a surgeon to perform the
operation, and he was already come with his 'prentice and instruments.
Having examined the patient's head, he began to prepare his dressings;
though Grieve still retained his first opinion that there was no
fracture, and was the more confirmed in it as the 'squire had passed the
night in profound sleep, uninterrupted by any catching or convulsion.
The York surgeon said he could not tell whether there was a fracture,
until he should take off the scalp; but, at any rate, the operation
might be of service in giving vent to any blood that might be
extravasated, either above or below the dura mater. The lady and her son
were clear for trying the experiment; and Grieve was dismissed with
some marks of contempt, which, perhaps, he owed to the plainness of his
appearance. He seemed to be about the middle age, wore his own black
hair without any sort of dressing; by his garb, one would have taken
him for a quaker, but he had none of the stiffness of that sect, on the
contrary he was very submissive, respectful, and remarkably taciturn.

Leaving the ladies in an apartment by themselves, we adjourned to the
patient's chamber, where the dressings and instruments were displayed
in order upon a pewter dish. The operator, laying aside his coat and
periwig, equipped himself with a night-cap, apron, and sleeves, while
his 'prentice and footman, seizing the 'squire's head, began to place
it in a proper posture.--But mark what followed.--The patient, bolting
upright in the bed, collared each of these assistants with the grasp of
Hercules, exclaiming, in a bellowing tone, 'I ha'n't lived so long in
Yorkshire to be trepanned by such vermin as you;' and leaping on the
floor, put on his breeches quietly, to the astonishment of us all. The
Surgeon still insisted upon the operation, alleging it was now plain
that the brain was injured, and desiring the servants put him into
bed again; but nobody would venture to execute his orders, or even to
interpose: when the 'squire turned him and his assistants out of doors,
and threw his apparatus out at the window. Having thus asserted his
prerogative, and put on his cloaths with the help of a valet, the count,
with my nephew and me, were introduced by his son, and received with his
usual stile of rustic civility; then turning to signor Macaroni, with a
sarcastic grin, 'I tell thee what, Dick (said he), a man's scull is not
to be bored every time his head is broken; and I'll convince thee and
thy mother, that I know as many tricks as e'er an old fox in the West
Riding.'

We afterwards understood he had quarrelled at a public house with an
exciseman, whom he challenged to a bout at single stick, in which he had
been worsted; and that the shame of this defeat had tied up his tongue.
As for madam, she had shewn no concern for his disaster, and now heard
of his recovery without emotion--She had taken some little notice of
my sister and niece, though rather with a view to indulge her own
petulance, than out of any sentiment of regard to our family.--She said
Liddy was a fright, and ordered her woman to adjust her head before
dinner; but she would not meddle with Tabby, whose spirit, she soon
perceived, was not to be irritated with impunity. At table, she
acknowledged me so far as to say she had heard of my father; though
she hinted, that he had disobliged her family by making a poor match
in Wales. She was disagreeably familiar in her enquiries about our
circumstances; and asked, if I intended to bring up my nephew to the
law. I told her, that, as he had an independent fortune, he should
follow no profession but that of a country gentleman; and that I was not
without hopes of procuring for him a seat in parliament--'Pray cousin
(said she), what may his fortune be?' When I answered, that, with what
I should be able to give him, he would have better than two thousand a
year, she replied, with a disdainful toss of her head, that it would
be impossible for him to preserve his independence on such a paultry
provision.

Not a little nettled at this arrogant remark, I told her, I had the
honour to sit in parliament with her father, when he had little more
than half that income; and I believed there was not a more independent
and incorruptible member in the house. 'Ay; but times are changed (cried
the 'squire)--Country gentlemen now-a-days live after another fashion.
My table alone stands me in a cool thousand a quarter, though I raise
my own stock, import my own liquors, and have every thing at the first
hand.--True it is, I keep open house, and receive all corners, for the
honour of Old England.' 'If that be the case (said I), 'tis a wonder you
can maintain it at so small an expence; but every private gentleman is
not expected to keep a caravanserai for the accommodation of travellers:
indeed, if every individual lived in the same stile, you would not have
such a number of guests at your table, of consequence your hospitality
would not shine so bright for the glory of the West Riding.' The
young 'squire, tickled by this ironical observation, exclaimed, 'O che
burla!'--his mother eyed me in silence with a supercilious air; and
the father of the feast, taking a bumper of October, 'My service to you,
cousin Bramble (said he), I have always heard there was something keen
and biting in the air of the Welch mountains.'

I was much pleased with the count de Melville, who is sensible, easy,
and polite; and the countess is the most amiable woman I ever beheld.
In the afternoon they took leave of their entertainers, and the young
gentleman, mounting his horse, undertook to conduct their coach through
the park, while one of their servants rode round to give notice to the
rest, whom they had left at a public house on the road. The moment
their backs were turned, the censorious daemon took possession of our
Yorkshire landlady and our sister Tabitha--The former observed, that
the countess was a good sort of a body, but totally ignorant of good
breeding, consequently aukward in her address. The squire said, he did
not pretend to the breeding of any thing but colts; but that the jade
would be very handsome, if she was a little more in flesh. 'Handsome!
(cried Tabby) she has indeed a pair of black eyes without any meaning;
but then there is not a good feature in her face.' 'I know not what you
call good features in Wales (replied our landlord); but they'll pass in
Yorkshire.' Then turning to Liddy, he added, 'What say you, my pretty
Redstreak?--what is your opinion of the countess?' 'I think (cried
Liddy, with great emotion), she's an angel.' Tabby chid her for talking
with such freedom in company; and the lady of the house said, in a
contemptuous tone, she supposed miss had been brought up at some country
boarding-school.

Our conversation was suddenly interrupted by the young gentleman,
who galloped into the yard all aghast, exclaiming, that the coach was
attacked by a great number of highwaymen. My nephew and I rushed out,
found his own and his servant's horse ready saddled in the stable, with
pistols in the caps--We mounted instantly, ordering Clinker and Dutton
to follow with all possible expedition; but notwithstanding all the
speed we could make, the action was over before we arrived, and the
count with his lady, safe lodged at the house of Grieve, who had
signalized himself in a very remarkable manner on this occasion. At the
turning of a lane, that led to the village where the count's servants
remained, a couple of robbers a-horseback suddenly appeared, with their
pistols advanced: one kept the coachman in awe, and the other demanded
the count's money, while the young 'squire went off at full speed,
without ever casting a look behind. The count desiring the thief to
withdraw his pistol, as the lady was in great terror, delivered his
purse without making the least resistance; but not satisfied with this
booty, which was pretty considerable, the rascal insisted upon rifling
her of her car-rings and necklace, and the countess screamed with
affright. Her husband, exasperated at the violence with which she was
threatened, wrested the pistol out of the fellow's hand, and turning it
upon him, snapped it in his face; but the robber knowing there was no
charge in it, drew another from his bosom, and in all probability would
have killed him on the spot, had not his life been saved by a wonderful
interposition. Grieve, the apothecary, chancing to pass that very
instant, ran up to the coach, and with a crab-stick, which was all the
weapon he had, brought the fellow to the ground with the first blow;
then seizing his pistol, presented it at his colleague, who fired his
piece at random, and fled without further opposition. The other was
secured by the assistance of the count and the coachman; and his legs
being tied under the belly of his own horse, Grieve conducted him to
the village, whither also the carriage proceeded. It was with great
difficulty the countess could be kept from swooning; but at last she was
happily conveyed to the house of the apothecary, who went into the shop
to prepare some drops for her, while his wife and daughter administered
to her in another apartment.

I found the count standing in the kitchen with the parson of the parish,
and expressing much impatience to see his protector, whom as yet he had
scarce found time to thank for the essential service he had done him
and the countess.--The daughter passing at the same time with a glass of
water, monsieur de Melville could not help taking notice of her figure,
which was strikingly engaging.--'Ay (said the parson), she is the
prettiest girl, and the best girl in all my parish: and if I could give
my son an estate of ten thousand a year, he should have my consent to
lay it at her feet. If Mr Grieve had been as solicitious about getting
money, as he has been in performing all the duties of a primitive
Christian, he would not have hung so long upon his hands.' 'What is her
name?' said I. 'Sixteen years ago (answered the vicar) I christened her
by the names of Seraphina Melvilia.' 'Ha! what! how! (cried the count
eagerly) sure, you said Seraphina Melvilia.' 'I did (said he); Mr Grieve
told me those were the names of two noble persons abroad, to whom he had
been obliged for more than life.'

The count, without speaking another syllable, rushed into the parlour,
crying, 'This is your god-daughter, my dear.' Mrs Grieve, then seizing
the countess by the hand, exclaimed with great agitation, 'O madam! O
sir!--I am--I am your poor Elinor.--This is my Seraphina Melvilia O
child! these are the count and countess of Melville, the generous the
glorious benefactors of thy once unhappy parents.'

The countess rising from her scat threw her arms about the neck of the
amiable Seraphina, and clasped her to her breast with great tenderness,
while she herself was embraced by the weeping mother. This moving scene
was completed by the entrance of Grieve himself, who falling on his
knees before the count, 'Behold (said he) a penitent, who at length
can look upon his patron without shrinking.' 'Ah, Ferdinand! (cried he,
raising and folding him in his arms) the playfellow of my infancy--the
companion of my youth!--Is it to you then I am indebted for my
life?' 'Heaven has heard my prayer (said the other), and given me an
opportunity to prove myself not altogether unworthy of your clemency and
protection.' He then kissed the hand of the countess, while monsieur
de Melville saluted his wife and lovely daughter, and all of us were
greatly affected by this pathetic recognition.

In a word, Grieve was no other than Ferdinand count Fathom, whose
adventures were printed many years ago. Being a sincere convert to
virtue, he had changed his name, that he might elude the enquiries of
the count, whose generous allowance he determined to forego, that he
might have no dependence but upon his own industry and moderation. He
had accordingly settled in this village as a practitioner in surgery and
physic, and for some years wrestled with all the miseries of indigence,
which, however, he and his wife had borne with the most exemplary
resignation. At length, by dint of unwearied attention to the duties of
his profession, which he exercised with equal humanity and success, he
had acquired tolerable share of business among the farmers and common
people, which enabled him to live in a decent manner. He had been scarce
ever seen to smile; was unaffectedly pious; and all the time he could
spare from the avocations of his employment, he spent in educating
his daughter, and in studying for his own improvement. In short, the
adventurer Fathom was, under the name of Grieve, universally respected
among the commonalty of this district, as a prodigy of learning and
virtue. These particulars I learned from the vicar, when we quitted the
room, that they might be under no restraint in their mutual effusions.
I make no doubt that Grieve will be pressed to leave off business,
and re-unite himself to the count's family; and as the countess seemed
extremely fond of his daughter, she will, in all probability, insist
upon Seraphina's accompanying her to Scotland.

Having paid our compliments to these noble persons, we returned to the
'squire's, where we expected an invitation to pass the night, which was
wet and raw; but it seems, 'squire Burdock's hospitality reached not so
far for the honour of Yorkshire; we therefore departed in the evening,
and lay at an inn, where I caught cold.

In hope of riding it down before it could take fast hold on my
constitution, I resolved to visit another relation, one Mr Pimpernel,
who lived about a dozen miles from the place where we lodged. Pimpernel
being the youngest of four sons, was bred an attorney at Furnival's inn;
but all his elder brothers dying, he got himself called to the bar for
the honour of his family, and soon after this preferment, succeeded to
his father's estate which was very considerable. He carried home with
him all the knavish chicanery of the lowest pettifogger, together with
a wife whom he had purchased of a drayman for twenty pounds; and he soon
found means to obtain a dedimus as an acting justice of peace. He is not
only a sordid miser in his disposition, but his avarice is mingled
with a spirit of despotism, which is truly diabolical.--He is a brutal
husband, an unnatural parent, a harsh master, an oppressive landlord, a
litigious neighbour, and a partial magistrate. Friends he has none;
and in point of hospitality and good breeding, our cousin Burdock is a
prince in comparison of this ungracious miscreant, whose house is the
lively representation of a gaol. Our reception was suitable to the
character I have sketched. Had it depended upon the wife, we should have
been kindly treated.--She is really a good sort of a woman, in spite
of her low original, and well respected in the country; but she has not
interest enough in her own house to command a draught of table beer,
far less to bestow any kind of education on her children, who run about,
like tagged colts, in a state of nature.--Pox on him! he is such a dirty
fellow, that I have not patience to prosecute the subject.

By that time we reached Harrigate, I began to be visited by certain
rheumatic symptoms. The Scotch lawyer, Mr Micklewhimmen, recommended a
hot bath of these waters so earnestly, that I was over-persuaded to try
the experiment.--He had used it often with success and always stayed an
hour in the bath, which was a tub filled with Harrigate water, heated
for the purpose. If I could hardly bear the smell of a single tumbler
when cold, you may guess how my nose was regaled by the streams arising
from a hot bath of the same fluid. At night, I was conducted into a dark
hole on the ground floor, where the tub smoaked and stunk like the pot
of Acheron, in one corner, and in another stood a dirty bed provided
with thick blankets, in which I was to sweat after coming out of the
bath. My heart seemed to die within me when I entered this dismal
bagnio, and found my brain assaulted by such insufferable effluvia. I
cursed Micklewhimmen for not considering that my organs were formed on
this side of the Tweed; but being ashamed to recoil upon the threshold,
I submitted to the process.

After having endured all but real suffocation for above a quarter of an
hour in the tub, I was moved to the bed and wrapped in blankets.--There
I lay a full hour panting with intolerable heat; but not the least
moisture appearing on my skin, I was carried to my own chamber, and
passed the night without closing an eye, in such a flutter of spirits as
rendered me the most miserable wretch in being. I should certainly
have run distracted, if the rarefaction of my blood, occasioned by
that Stygian bath, had not burst the vessels, and produced a violent
haemorrhage, which, though dreadful and alarming, removed the horrible
disquiet--I lost two pounds of blood, and more, on this occasion; and
find myself still weak and languid; but, I believe, a little exercise
will forward my recovery, and therefore I am resolved to set out
to-morrow for York, in my way to Scarborough, where I propose to brace
up my fibres by sea-bathing, which, I know, is one of your favourite
specificks. There is, however, one disease, for which you have found as
yet no specific, and that is old age, of which this tedious unconnected
epistle is an infallible symptom: what, therefore, cannot be cured, must
be endured, by you, as well as by

Yours, MATT. BRAMBLE HARRIGATE, June 26.




To Sir WATKIN PHILLIPS, Bart. of Jesus college, Oxon.

DEAR KNIGHT,

The manner of living at Harrigate was so agreeable to my disposition,
that I left the place with some regret--Our aunt Tabby would have
probably made some objection to our departing so soon, had not an
accident embroiled her with Mr Micklewhimmen, the Scotch advocate,
on whose heart she had been practising, from the second day after our
arrival--That original, though seemingly precluded from the use of
his limbs, had turned his genius to good account--In short, by dint of
groaning, and whining, he had excited the compassion of the company so
effectually, that an old lady, who occupied the very best apartment in
the house, gave it up for his case and convenience. When his man led him
into the Long Room, all the females were immediately in commotion--One
set an elbow-chair; another shook up the cushion; a third brought a
stool; and a fourth a pillow, for the accommodation of his feet--
Two ladies (of whom Tabby was always one) supported him into the
dining-room, and placed him properly at the table; and his taste was
indulged with a succession of delicacies, culled by their fair hands.
All this attention he repaid with a profusion of compliments and
benedictions, which were not the less agreeable for being delivered in
the Scottish dialect. As for Mrs Tabitha, his respects were particularly
addressed to her, and he did not fail to mingle them with religious
reflections, touching free grace, knowing her bias to methodism, which
he also professed upon a calvinistical model.

For my part, I could not help thinking this lawyer was not such an
invalid as he pretended to be. I observed he ate very heartily three
times a day; and though his bottle was marked stomachic tincture, he
had recourse to it so often, and seemed to swallow it with such peculiar
relish, that I suspected it was not compounded in the apothecary's shop,
or the chemist's laboratory. One day, while he was earnest in discourse
with Mrs Tabitha, and his servant had gone out on some occasion or
other, I dexterously exchanged the labels, and situation of his bottle
and mine; and having tasted his tincture, found it was excellent claret.
I forthwith handed it about me to some of my neighbours, and it was
quite emptied before Mr Micklewhimmen had occasion to repeat his
draught. At length, turning about, he took hold of my bottle, instead of
his own, and, filling a large glass, drank to the health of Mrs Tabitha.
It had scarce touched his lips, when he perceived the change which had
been put upon him, and was at first a little out of countenance. He
seemed to retire within himself, in order to deliberate, and in half a
minute his resolution was taken; addressing himself to our quarter, 'I
give the gentleman credit for his wit (said he); it was a gude practical
joke; but sometimes hi joci in seria ducunt mala--I hope for his own
sake he has na drank all the liccor; for it was a vara poorful infusion
of jallap in Bourdeaux wine; at its possable he may ha ta'en sic a dose
as will produce a terrible catastrophe in his ain booels--'

By far the greater part of the contents had fallen to the share of a
young clothier from Leeds, who had come to make a figure at Harrigate,
and was, in effect a great coxcomb in his way. It was with a view to
laugh at his fellow-guests, as well as to mortify the lawyer, that he
had emptied the bottle, when it came to his turn, and he had laughed
accordingly: but now his mirth gave way to his apprehension--He began
to spit, to make wry faces, and writhe himself into various
contorsions--'Damn the stuff! (cried he) I thought it had a villainous
twang--pah! He that would cozen a Scot, mun get oope betimes, and take
Old Scratch for his counsellor--' 'In troth mester what d'ye ca'um
(replied the lawyer), your wit has run you into a filthy puddle--I'm
truly consarned for your waeful case--The best advice I can give you, in
sic a delemma, is to send an express to Rippon for doctor Waugh, without
delay, and, in the mean time, swallow all the oil and butter you can
find in the hoose, to defend your poor stomach and intastines from the
villication of the particles of the jallap, which is vara violent, even
when taken in moderation.'

The poor clothier's torments had already begun: he retired, roaring with
pain, to his own chamber; the oil was swallowed, and the doctor
sent for; but before he arrived, the miserable patient had made such
discharges upwards and downwards, that nothing remained to give him
further offence; and this double evacuation, was produced by imagination
alone; for what he had drank was genuine wine of Bourdeaux, which the
lawyer had brought from Scotland for his own private use. The clothier,
finding the joke turn out so expensive and disagreeable, quitted the
house next morning, leaving the triumph to Micklewhimmen, who enjoyed it
internally without any outward signs of exultation--on the contrary, he
affected to pity the young man for what he had suffered; and acquired
fresh credit from this shew of moderation.

It was about the middle of the night, which succeeded this adventure,
that the vent of the kitchen chimney being foul, the soot took fire, and
the alarm was given in a dreadful manner. Every body leaped naked out
of bed, and in a minute the whole house was filled with cries and
confusion--There was two stairs in the house, and to these we naturally
ran; but they were both so blocked up, by the people pressing one upon
another, that it seemed impossible to pass, without throwing down
and trampling upon the women. In the midst of this anarchy, Mr
Micklewhimmen, with a leathern portmanteau on his back, came running
as nimble as a buck along the passage; and Tabby in her underpetticoat,
endeavouring to hook him under the arm, that she might escape through
his protection, he very fairly pushed her down, crying, 'Na, na, gude
faith, charity begins at hame!' Without paying the least respect to the
shrieks and intreaties of his female friends, he charged through the
midst of the crowd, overturning every thing that opposed him; and
actually fought his way to the bottom of the Stair-case--By this time
Clinker had found a ladder by which he entered the window of my uncle's
chamber, where our family was assembled, and proposed that we should
make our exit successively by that conveyance. The 'squire exhorted his
sister to begin the descent; but, before she could resolve, her woman,
Mrs Winifred Jenkins, in a transport of terror, threw herself out at the
window upon the ladder, while Humphry dropped upon the ground, that
he might receive her in her descent--This maiden was just as she had
started out of bed, the moon shone very bright, and a fresh breeze of
wind blowing, none of Mrs Winifred's beauties could possibly escape the
view of the fortunate Clinker, whose heart was not able to withstand the
united force of so many charms; at least I am much mistaken, if he has
not been her humble slave from that moment--He received her in his arms,
and, giving her his coat to protect her from the weather, ascended again
with admirable dexterity.

At that instant, the landlord of the house called out with an audible
voice, that the fire was extinguished, and the ladies had nothing
further to fear: this was a welcome note to the audience, and produced
an immediate effect; the shrieking ceased, and a confused sound of
expostulation ensued. I conducted Mrs Tabitha and my sister to their own
chamber, where Liddy fainted away; but was soon brought to herself.
Then I went to offer my services to the other ladies, who might want
assistance--They were all scudding through the passage to their several
apartments; and as the thoroughfair was lighted by two lamps, I had a
pretty good observation of them in their transit; but as most of them
were naked to the smock, and all their heads shrowded in huge nightcaps,
I could not distinguish one face from another, though I recognized
some of their voices--These were generally plaintive; some wept, some
scolded, and some prayed--I lifted up one poor old gentlewoman, who had
been overturned and sore bruised by a multitude of feet; and this
was also the case with the lame person from Northumberland, whom
Micklewhimmen had in his passage overthrown, though not with impunity,
for the cripple, in falling, gave him such a good pelt on the head with
his crutch, that the blood followed.

As for this lawyer, he waited below till the hurly burly was over, and
then stole softly to his own chamber, from whence he did not venture to
make a second sally till eleven in the forenoon, when he was led into
the Public Room, by his own servant and another assistant, groaning most
woefully, with a bloody napkin round his head. But things were greatly
altered--The selfish brutality of his behaviour on the stairs had
steeled their hearts against all his arts and address--Not a soul
offered to accommodate him with a chair, cushion, or footstool; so that
he was obliged to sit down on a hard bench--In that position, he looked
around with a rueful aspect, and, bowing very low, said in a
whining tone, 'Your most humble servant, ladies--Fire is a dreadful
calamity'--'Fire purifies gold, and it ties friendship,' cried Mrs
Tabitha, bridling. 'Yea, madam (replied Micklewhimmen); and it trieth
discretion also'--'If discretion consists in forsaking a friend in
adversity, you are eminently possessed of that virtue' (resumed our
aunt).--'Na, madam (rejoined the advocate), well I wot, I cannot claim
any merit from the mode of my retreat--Ye'll please to observe, ladies,
there are twa independent principles that actuate our nature--One is
instinct, which we have in common with the brute creation, and the other
is reason--Noo, in certain great emergencies, when the faculty of reason
is suspended, instinct taks the lead, and when this predominates, having
no affinity with reason, it pays no sort of regard to its connections;
it only operates for the preservation of the individual, and that by the
most expeditious and effectual means; therefore, begging your pardon,
ladies, I'm no accountable in foro conscientioe for what I did, while
under the influence of this irresistible pooer.'

Here my uncle interposing, 'I should be glad to know (said he), whether
it was instinct that prompted you to retreat with bag and baggage; for,
I think, you had a portmanteau on your shoulder' The lawyer answered,
without hesitation, 'Gif I might tell my mind freely, withoot incuring
the suspicion of presumption, I should think it was something superior
to either reason or instinct which suggested that measure, and this on
a twafold accoont: in the first place, the portmanteau contained the
writings of a worthy nobleman's estate; and their being burnt would have
occasioned a loss that could not be repaired; secondly, my good angel
seems to have laid the portmanteau on my shoulders, by way of defence,
to sustain the violence of a most inhuman blow, from the crutch of a
reverend clergyman, which, even in spite of that medium, hath wounded
me sorely, even unto the pericranium.' 'By your own doctrine (cried the
parson, who chanced to be present), I am not accountable for the blow,
which was the effect of instinct.' 'I crave your pardon, reverend sir
(said the other), instinct never acts but for the preservation of the
individual; but your preservation was out of the case--you had already
received the damage, and therefore the blow must be imputed to revenge,
which is a sinful passion, that ill becomes any Christian, especially a
protestant divine; and let me tell you, most reverend doctor, gin I had
a mind to plea, the law would hauld my libel relevant.' 'Why, the damage
is pretty equal on both sides (cried the parson); your head is broke,
and my crutch is snapt in the middle. Now, if you will repair the one, I
will be at the expence of curing the other.'

This sally raised the laugh against Micklewhimmen, who began to look
grave; when my uncle, in order to change the discourse, observed,
that instinct had been very kind to him in another respect; for it had
restored to him the use of his limbs, which, in his exit, he had moved
with surprising agility.--He replied, that it was the nature of fear to
brace up the nerves; and mentioned some surprising feats of strength
and activity performed by persons under the impulse of terror; but he
complained that in his own particular, the effects had ceased when the
cause was taken away--The 'squire said, he would lay a tea-drinking on
his head, that he should dance a Scotch measure, without making a false
step; and the advocate grinning, called for the piper--A fidler being
at hand, this original started up, with his bloody napkin over his black
tye-periwig, and acquitted himself in such a manner as excited the mirth
of the whole company; but he could not regain the good graces of Mrs
Tabby, who did not understand the principle of instinct; and the lawyer
did not think it worth his while to proceed to further demonstration.

From Harrigate, we came hither, by the way of York, and here we shall
tarry some days, as my uncle and Tabitha are both resolved to make use
of the waters. Scarborough, though a paltry town, is romantic from its
situation along a cliff that over-hangs the sea. The harbour is formed
by a small elbow of land that runs out as a natural mole, directly
opposite to the town; and on that side is the castle, which stands very
high, of considerable extent, and, before the invention of gun-powder,
was counted impregnable. At the other end of Scarborough are two public
rooms for the use of the company, who resort to this place in the summer
to drink the waters and bathe in the sea; and the diversions are pretty
much on the same footing here as at Bath. The Spa is a little way beyond
the town, on this side, under a cliff, within a few paces of the sea,
and thither the drinkers go every morning in dishabille; but the descent
is by a great number of steps, which invalids find very inconvenient.
Betwixt the well and the harbour, the bathing machines are ranged along
the beach, with all their proper utensils and attendants. You have never
seen one of these machines--Image to yourself a small, snug, wooden
chamber, fixed upon a wheel-carriage, having a door at each end, and on
each side a little window above, a bench below--The bather, ascending
into this apartment by wooden steps, shuts himself in, and begins to
undress, while the attendant yokes a horse to the end next the sea, and
draws the carriage forwards, till the surface of the water is on a level
with the floor of the dressing-room, then he moves and fixes the horse
to the other end--The person within being stripped, opens the door to
the sea-ward, where he finds the guide ready, and plunges headlong into
the water--After having bathed, he re-ascends into the apartment, by the
steps which had been shifted for that purpose, and puts on his clothes
at his leisure, while the carriage is drawn back again upon the dry
land; so that he has nothing further to do, but to open the door, and
come down as he went up--Should he be so weak or ill as to require
a servant to put off and on his clothes, there is room enough in the
apartment for half a dozen people. The guides who attend the ladies in
the water, are of their own sex, and they and the female bathers have
a dress of flannel for the sea; nay, they are provided with other
conveniences for the support of decorum. A certain number of the
machines are fitted with tilts, that project from the sea-ward ends
of them, so as to screen the bathers from the view of all persons
whatsoever--The beach is admirably adapted for this practice, the
descent being gently gradual, and the sand soft as velvet; but then the
machines can be used only at a certain time of the tide, which varies
every day; so that sometimes the bathers are obliged to rise very early
in the morning--For my part, I love swimming as an exercise, and
can enjoy it at all times of the tide, without the formality of an
apparatus--You and I have often plunged together into the Isis; but
the sea is a much more noble bath, for health as well as pleasure. You
cannot conceive what a flow of spirits it gives, and how it braces every
sinew of the human frame. Were I to enumerate half the diseases which
are every day cured by sea-bathing, you might justly say you had
received a treatise, instead of a letter, from

Your affectionate friend and servant, J. MELFORD SCARBOROUGH, July 1.




To Dr LEWIS.

I have not found all the benefit I expected at Scarborough, where I have
been these eight days--From Harrigate we came hither by the way of York,
where we stayed only one day to visit the Castle, the Minster and
the Assembly-room. The first, which was heretofore a fortress, is now
converted to a prison, and is the best, in all respects, I ever saw,
at home or abroad--It stands in a high situation, extremely well
ventilated; and has a spacious area within the walls, for the health and
convenience of all the prisoners except those whom it is necessary to
secure in close confinement. Even these last have all the comforts that
the nature of their situation can admit. Here the assizes are held, in a
range of buildings erected for that purpose.

As for the Minster, I know not how to distinguish it, except by its
great size and the height of its spire, from those other ancient
churches in different parts of the kingdom, which used to be called
monuments of Gothic architecture; but it is now agreed, that this stile
is Saracen rather than Gothic; and, I suppose, it was first imported
into England from Spain, great part of which was under the dominion of
the Moors. Those British architects who adopted this stile, don't seem
to have considered the propriety of their adoption. The climate of the
country, possessed by the Moors or Saracens, both in Africa and Spain,
was so exceedingly hot and dry, that those who built places of worship
for the multitude, employed their talents in contriving edifices that
should be cool; and, for this purpose, nothing could be better adopted
than those buildings, vast, narrow, dark, and lofty, impervious to the
sun-beams, and having little communication with the scorched external
atmosphere; but ever affording a refreshing coolness, like subterranean
cellars in the heats of summer, or natural caverns in the bowels of huge
mountains. But nothing could be more preposterous, than to imitate such
a mode of architecture in a country like England, where the climate
is cold, and the air eternally loaded with vapours; and where, of
consequence, the builder's intention should be to keep the people dry
and warm--For my part, I never entered the Abbey church at Bath but
once, and the moment I stept over the threshold, I found myself chilled
to the very marrow of my bones. When we consider, that in our churches,
in general, we breathe a gross stagnated air, surcharged with damps
from vaults, tombs, and charnel-houses, may we not term them so many
magazines of rheums, created for the benefit of the medical faculty? and
safely aver, that more bodies are lost, than souls saved, by going to
church, in the winter especially, which may be said to engross eight
months in the year. I should be glad to know, what offence it would give
to tender consciences, if the house of God was made more comfortable,
or less dangerous to the health of valetudinarians; and whether it
would not be an encouragement to piety, as well as the salvation of many
lives, if the place of worship was well floored, wainscotted, warmed,
and ventilated, and its area kept sacred from the pollution of the
dead. The practice of burying in churches was the effect of ignorant
superstition, influenced by knavish priests, who pretended that the
devil could have no power over the defunct if he was interred in holy
ground; and this indeed, is the only reason that can be given for
consecrating all cemeteries, even at this day.

The external appearance of an old cathedral cannot be but displeasing to
the eye of every man, who has any idea of propriety or proportion, even
though he may be ignorant of architecture as a science; and the long
slender spire puts one in mind of a criminal impaled with a sharp stake
rising up through his shoulder--These towers, or steeples, were likewise
borrowed from the Mahometans; who, having no bells, used such minarets
for the purpose of calling the people to prayers--They may be of further
use, however, for making observations and signals; but I would vote for
their being distinct from the body of the church, because they serve
only to make the pile more barbarous, or Saracenical.

There is nothing of this Arabic architecture in the Assembly Room, which
seems to me to have been built upon a design of Palladio, and might
be converted into an elegant place of worship; but it is indifferently
contrived for that sort of idolatry which is performed in it at present:
the grandeur of the fane gives a diminutive effect to the little painted
divinities that are adorned in it, and the company, on a ball-night,
must look like an assembly of fantastic fairies, revelling by moonlight
among the columns of a Grecian temple.

Scarborough seems to be falling off, in point of reputation. All these
places (Bath excepted) have their vogue, and then the fashion changes.
I am persuaded, there are fifty spaws in England as efficacious and
salutary as that of Scarborough, though they have not yet risen to fame;
and, perhaps, never will, unless some medical encomiast should find an
interest in displaying their virtues to the public view--Be that as it
may, recourse will always be had to this place for the convenience of
sea bathing, while this practice prevails; but it were to be wished,
they would make the beach more accessible to invalids.

I have here met with my old acquaintance, H[ewet]t, whom you have often
heard me mention as one of the most original characters upon earth--I
first knew him at Venice, and afterwards saw him in different parts of
Italy, where he was well known by the nick-name of Cavallo Bianco,
from his appearing always mounted on a pale horse, like Death in the
Revelations. You must remember the account I once gave you of a curious
dispute he had at Constantinople, with a couple of Turks, in defence of
the Christian religion; a dispute from which he acquired the epithet
of Demonstrator--The truth is, H--owns no religion but that of nature;
but, on this occasion, he was stimulated to shew his parts, for the
honour of his country--Some years ago, being in the Campidoglio at Rome,
he made up to the bust of Jupiter, and, bowing very low, exclaimed in
the Italian language, 'I hope, sir, if ever you get your head above
water again, you will remember that I paid my respects to you in your
adversity.' This sally was reported to the cardinal Camerlengo, and by
him laid before pope Benedict XIV, who could not help laughing at the
extravagance of the address, and said to the cardinal, 'Those English
heretics think they have a right to go to the devil in their own way.'

Indeed H-- was the only Englishman I ever knew, who had resolution
enough to live in his own way, in the midst of foreigners; for, neither
in dress, diet, customs, or conversation, did he deviate one tittle from
the manner in which he had been brought up. About twelve years ago, he
began a Giro or circuit, which he thus performed--At Naples, where
he fixed his headquarters, he embarked for Marseilles, from whence he
travelled with a Voiturin to Antibes--There he took his passage to
Genoa and Lerici; from which last place he proceeded, by the way of
Cambratina, to Pisa and Florence--After having halted some time in
this metropolis, he set out with a Vetturino for Rome, where he reposed
himself a few weeks, and then continued his route for Naples, in order
to wait for the next opportunity of embarkation--After having twelve
times described this circle, he lately flew off at a tangent to visit
some trees at his country-house in England, which he had planted above
twenty years ago, after the plan of the double colonnade in the piazza
of St Peter's at Rome--He came hither to Scarborough, to pay his
respects to his noble friend and former pupil, the M-- of G--, and,
forgetting that he is now turned of seventy, sacrificed so liberally to
Bacchus, that next day he was seized with a fit of the apoplexy, which
has a little impaired his memory; but he retains all the oddity of
his character in perfection, and is going back to Italy by the way of
Geneva, that he may have a conference with his friend Voltaire, about
giving the last blow to the Christian superstition--He intends to take
shipping here for Holland or Hamburgh; for it is a matter of great
indifference to him at what part of the continent he first lands.

When he was going abroad the last time, he took his passage in a ship
bound for Leghorn, and his baggage was actually embarked. In going down
the river by water, he was by mistake put on board of another
vessel under sail; and, upon inquiry understood she was bound to
Petersburgh--'Petersburgh,--Petersburgh (said he) I don't care if I go
along with you.' He forthwith struck a bargain with the captain; bought
a couple of shirts of the mate, and was safe conveyed to the court of
Muscovy, from whence he travelled by land to receive his baggage at
Leghorn--He is now more likely than ever to execute a whim of the same
nature; and I will hold any wager, that as he cannot be supposed to live
much longer, according to the course of nature, his exit will be as odd
as his life has been extravagant.

[This gentleman crossed the sea to France, visited and conferred with
Mr de Voltaire at Fernay, resumed his old circuit at Genoa, and died in
1767, at the house of Vanini in Florence. Being taken with a suppression
of urine, he resolved, in imitation of Pomponius Atticus, to take
himself off by abstinence; and this resolution he executed like an
ancient Roman. He saw company to the last, cracked his jokes, conversed
freely, and entertained his guests with music. On the third day of his
fast, he found himself entirely freed of his complaint; but refused
taking sustenance. He said the most disagreeable part of the voyage was
past, and he should be a cursed fool indeed, to put about ship, when he
was just entering the harbour. In these sentiments he persisted, without
any marks of affectation, and thus finished his course with such
case and serenity, as would have done honour to the firmest Stoic of
antiquity.]

But, to return from one humourist to another, you must know I have
received benefit, both from the chalybeate and the sea, and would have
used them longer, had not a most ridiculous adventure, by making me the
town-talk, obliged me to leave the place; for I can't bear the thoughts
of affording a spectacle to the multitude Yesterday morning, at six
o'clock, I went down to the bathing-place, attended by my servant
Clinker, who waited on the beach as usual--The wind blowing from the
north, and the weather being hazy, the water proved so chill, that when
I rose from my first plunge, I could not help sobbing and bawling out,
from the effects of the cold. Clinker, who heard me cry, and saw me
indistinctly a good way without the guide, buffetting the waves, took it
for granted I was drowning, and rushing into the sea, clothes and all,
overturned the guide in his hurry to save his master. I had swam out
a few strokes, when hearing a noise, I turned about and saw Clinker,
already up to his neck, advancing towards me, with all the wildness of
terror in his aspect--Afraid he would get out of his depth, I made haste
to meet him, when, all of a sudden, he seized me by one ear, dragged me
bellowing with pain upon the dry beach, to the astonishment of all the
people, men, and women, and children there assembled.

I was so exasperated by the pain of my ear, and the disgrace of being
exposed in such an attitude, that, in the first transport I struck him
down; then, running back into the sea, took shelter in the machine where
my clothes had been deposited. I soon recollected myself so far as to do
justice to the poor fellow, who, in great simplicity of heart, had acted
from motives of fidelity and affection--Opening the door of the machine,
which was immediately drawn on shore, I saw him standing by the wheel,
dropping like a water-work, and trembling from head to foot; partly from
cold, and partly from the dread of having offended his master--I made
my acknowledgments for the blow he had received, assured him I was
not angry, and insisted upon his going home immediately, to shift his
clothes; a command which he could hardly find in his heart to execute,
so well disposed was he to furnish the mob with further entertainment
at my expence. Clinker's intention was laudable without all doubt, but,
nevertheless, I am a sufferer by his simplicity--I have had a burning
heat, and a strange buzzing noise in that ear, ever since it was so
roughly treated; and I cannot walk the street without being pointed at;
as the monster that was hauled naked a-shore upon the beach--Well, I
affirm that folly is often more provoking than knavery, aye and more
mischievous too; and whether a man had not better choose a sensible
rogue, than an honest simpleton for his servant, is no matter of doubt
with

Yours, MATT. BRAMBLE SCARBOROUGH, July 4.




To Sir WATKIN PHILLIPS, Bart of Jesus college, Oxon.

DEAR WAT,

We made a precipitate retreat from Scarborough, owing to the excessive
delicacy of our 'squire, who cannot bear the thoughts of being
proetereuntium digito monstratus.

One morning, while he was bathing in the sea, his man Clinker took it
in his head that his master was in danger of drowning; and, in this
conceit, plunging into the water, he lugged him out naked on the beach,
and almost pulled off his ear in the operation. You may guess how this
atchievement was relished by Mr Bramble, who is impatient, irascible,
and has the most extravagant ideas of decency and decorum in the
oeconomy of his own person--In the first ebullition of his choler, he
knocked Clinker down with his fist; but he afterwards made him amends
for his outrage, and, in order to avoid further notice of the people,
among whom this incident had made him remarkable, he resolved to leave
Scarborough next day.

We set out accordingly over the moors, by the way of Whitby, and began
our journey betimes, in hopes of reaching Stockton that night; but
in this hope we were disappointed--In the afternoon, crossing a deep
gutter, made by a torrent, the coach was so hard strained, that one of
the irons, which connect the frame, snapt, and the leather sling on the
same side, cracked in the middle. The shock was so great, that my sister
Liddy struck her head against Mrs Tabitha's nose with such violence that
the blood flowed; and Win. Jenkins was darted through a small window in
that part of the carriage next the horses, where she stuck like a bawd
in the pillory, till she was released by the hand of Mr Bramble. We
were eight miles distant from any place where we could be supplied with
chaises, and it was impossible to proceed with the coach, until the
damage should be repaired--in this dilemma, we discovered a blacksmith's
forge on the edge of a small common, about half a mile from the scene
of our disaster, and thither the postilions made shift to draw the
carriage, slowly, while the company walked a-foot; but we found the
black-smith had been dead some days; and his wife, who had been lately
delivered, was deprived of her senses, under the care of a nurse, hired
by the parish. We were exceedingly mortified at this disappointment,
which, however, was surmounted by the help of Humphry Clinker, who is a
surprising compound of genius and simplicity. Finding the tools of
the defunct, together with some coals in the smithy, he unscrewed the
damaged iron in a twinkling, and, kindling a fire, united the broken
pieces with equal dexterity and dispatch--While he was at work upon
this operation, the poor woman in the straw, struck with the well-known
sound of the hammer and anvil, started up, and, notwithstanding all the
nurse's efforts, came running into the smithy, where, throwing her arms
about Clinker's neck, 'Ah, Jacob (cried she) how could you leave me in
such a condition?'

This incident was too pathetic to occasion mirth--it brought tears into
the eyes of all present. The poor widow was put to bed again; and we
did not leave the village without doing something for her benefit--Even
Tabitha's charity was awakened on this occasion. As for the
tender-hearted Humphry Clinker, he hammered the iron and wept at the
same time--But his ingenuity was not confined to his own province of
farrier and black-smith--It was necessary to join the leather sling,
which had been broke; and this service he likewise performed, by means
of a broken awl, which he new-pointed and ground, a little hemp, which
he spun into lingels, and a few tacks which he made for the purpose.
Upon the whole, we were in a condition to proceed in little more than
an hour; but even this delay obliged us to pass the night at
Gisborough--Next day we crossed the Tees at Stockton, which is a neat
agreeable town; and there we resolved to dine, with purpose to lie at
Durham.

Whom should we meet in the yard, when we alighted, but Martin the
adventurer? Having handed out the ladies, and conducted them into an
apartment, where he payed his compliments to Mrs Tabby, with his usual
address, he begged leave to speak to my uncle in another room; and
there, in some confusion, he made an apology for having taken the
liberty to trouble him with a letter at Stevenage. He expressed his
hope, that Mr Bramble had bestowed some consideration on his unhappy
case, and repeated his desire of being taken into his service.

My uncle, calling me into the room, told him, that we were both
very well inclined to rescue him from a way of life that was equally
dangerous and dishonourable; and that he should have no scruples in
trusting to his gratitude and fidelity, if he had any employment
for him, which he thought would suit his qualifications and his
circumstances; but that all the departments he had mentioned in his
letter, were filled up by persons of whose conduct he had no reason to
complain; of consequence he could not, without injustice, deprive any
one of them of his bread. Nevertheless, he declared himself ready to
assist him in any feasible project, either with his purse or credit.

Martin seemed deeply touched at this declaration--The tear started
in his eye, while he said, in a faultering accent--'Worthy sir--your
generosity oppresses me--I never dreamed of troubling you for any
pecuniary assistance--indeed I have no occasion--I have been so lucky
at billiards and betting in different places, at Buxton, Harrigate,
Scarborough, and Newcastle races, that my stock in ready-money amounts
to three hundred pounds, which I would willingly employ, in prosecuting
some honest scheme of life; but my friend, justice Buzzard, has set
so many springs for my life, that I am under the necessity of either
retiring immediately to a remote part of the country, where I can enjoy
the protection of some generous patron, or of quitting the kingdom
altogether. It is upon this alternative that I now beg leave to ask your
advice. I have had information of all your route, since I had the honour
to see you at Stevenage; and, supposing you would come this way from
Scarborough, I came hither last night from Darlington, to pay you my
respects.'

'It would be no difficult matter to provide you with an asylum in the
country (replied my uncle); but a life of indolence and obscurity
would not suit with your active and enterprizing disposition--I would
therefore advise you to try your fortune in the East Indies--I will
give you a letter to a friend in London, who will recommend you to the
direction, for a commission in the company's service; and if that cannot
be obtained, you will at least be received as a volunteer--in which
case, you may pay for your passage, and I shall undertake to procure you
such credentials, that you will not be long without a commission.'

Martin embraced the proposal with great eagerness; it was therefore
resolved, that he should sell his horse, and take a passage by sea
for London, to execute the project without delay--In the mean time he
accompanied us to Durham, were we took up our quarters for the night.
Here, being furnished with letters from my uncle, he took his leave of
us, with strong symptoms of gratitude and attachment, and set out for
Sunderland, in order to embark in the first collier, bound for the
river Thames. He had not been gone half an hour, when we were joined
by another character, which promised something extraordinary--A tall,
meagre figure, answering, with his horse, the description of Don Quixote
mounted on Rozinante, appeared in the twilight at the inn door, while my
aunt and Liddy stood at a window in the dining-room--He wore a coat,
the cloth of which had once been scarlet, trimmed with Brandenburgs, now
totally deprived of their metal, and he had holstercaps and housing
of the same stuff and same antiquity. Perceiving ladies at the window
above, he endeavoured to dismount with the most graceful air he could
assume; but the ostler neglecting to hold the stirrup when he wheeled
off his right foot, and stood with his whole weight on the other, the
girth unfortunately gave way, the saddle turned, down came the cavalier
to the ground, and his hat and perriwig falling off, displayed a
head-piece of various colours, patched and plaistered in a woeful
condition--The ladies, at the window above, shrieked with affright, on
the supposition that the stranger had received some notable damages
in his fall; but the greatest injury he had sustained arose from the
dishonour of his descent, aggravated by the disgrace of exposing the
condition of his cranium; for certain plebeians that were about the
door, laughed aloud, in the belief that the captain had got either a
scald head, or a broken head, both equally opprobrious.

He forthwith leaped up in a fury, and snatching one of his pistols,
threatened to put the ostler to death, when another squall from the
women checked his resentment. He then bowed to the window, while he
kissed the butt-end of his pistol, which he replaced; adjusted his wig
in great confusion, and led his horse into the stable--By this time I
had come to the door, and could not help gazing at the strange figure
that presented itself to my view. He would have measured above six
feet in height had he stood upright; but he stooped very much; was very
narrow in the shoulders, and very thick in the calves of his legs, which
were cased in black spatterdashes--As for his thighs, they were long
and slender, like those of a grasshopper; his face was, at least, half
a yard in length, brown and shrivelled, with projecting cheek-bones,
little grey eyes on the greenish hue, a large hook-nose, a pointed chin,
a mouth from ear to car, very ill furnished with teeth, and a high,
narrow fore-head, well furrowed with wrinkles. His horse was exactly
in the stile of its rider; a resurrection of dry bones, which (as we
afterwards learned) he valued exceedingly, as the only present he had
ever received in his life.

Having seen this favourite steed properly accommodated in the stable, he
sent up his compliments to the ladies, begging permission to thank them
in person for the marks of concern they had shewn at his disaster in
the court yard--As the 'squire said they could not decently decline
his visit, he was shewn up stairs and paid his respects in the Scotch
dialect, with much formality 'Leddies (said he), perhaps ye may be
scandaleezed at the appearance of my heed made, when it was uncovered by
accident; but I can assure you, the condition you saw it in, is neither
the effects of diseases, nor of drunkenness: but an honest scar received
in the service of my country.' He then gave us to understand, that
having been wounded at Ticonderoga, in America, a party of Indians
rifled him, scalped him, broke his scull with the blow of a tomahawk,
and left him for dead on the field of battle; but that being afterwards
found with signs of life, he had been cured in the French hospital,
though the loss of substance could not be repaired; so that the scull
was left naked in several places, and these he covered with patches.

There is no hold by which an Englishman is sooner taken than that of
compassion--We were immediately interested in behalf of this veteran.
Even Tabby's heart was melted; but our pity was warmed with indignation,
when we learned, that in the course of two sanguinary wars, he had been
wounded, maimed, mutilated, taken, and enslaved, without ever having
attained a higher rank than that of lieutenant--My uncle's eyes gleamed,
and his nether lip quivered, while he exclaimed, 'I vow to God, sir,
your case is a reproach to the service--The injustice you have met
with is so flagrant'--'I must crave your pardon, sir (cried the other,
interrupting him), I complain of no injustice--I purchased an ensigncy
thirty years ago; and, in the course of service rose to a lieutenant,
according to my seniority'--'But in such a length of time (resumed the
'squire), you must have seen a great many young officers put over your
head'--'Nevertheless (said he), I have no cause to murmur--They bought
their preferment with their money--I had no money to carry to market
that was my misfortune; but no body was to blame'--'What! no friend
to advance a sum of money?' (said Mr Bramble) 'Perhaps, I might have
borrowed money for the purchase of a company (answered the other);
but that loan must have been refunded; and I did not chuse to incumber
myself with a debt of a thousand pounds, to be payed from an income
of ten shillings a-day.' 'So you have spent the best part of your life
(cried Mr Bramble), your youth, your blood, and your constitution,
amidst the dangers, the difficulties, the horrors and hardships of
a war, for the consideration of three or four shillings a-day a
consideration--' 'Sir (replied the Scot, with great warmth), you are the
man that does me injustice, if you say or think I have been actuated by
any such paltry consideration--I am a gentleman; and entered the service
as other gentlemen do, with such hopes and sentiments as honourable
ambition inspires--If I have not been lucky in the lottery of life, so
neither do I think myself unfortunate--I owe to no man a farthing; I can
always command a clean shirt, a mutton-chop, and a truss of straw; and
when I die, I shall leave effects sufficient to defray the expence of my
burial.'

My uncle assured him, he had no intention to give him the least offence,
by the observations he had made; but, on the contrary, spoke from a
sentiment of friendly regard to his interest--The lieutenant thanked
him with a stiffness of civility, which nettled our old gentleman, who
perceived that his moderation was all affected; for, whatsoever his
tongue might declare, his whole appearance denoted dissatisfaction--In
short, without pretending to judge of his military merit, I think I may
affirm, that this Caledonian is a self-conceited pedant, aukward, rude,
and disputacious--He has had the benefit of a school-education, seems
to have read a good number of books, his memory is tenacious, and he
pretends to speak several different languages; but he is so addicted to
wrangling, that he will cavil at the clearest truths, and, in the pride
of argumentation, attempt to reconcile contradictions--Whether his
address and qualifications are really of that stamp which is agreeable
to the taste of our aunt, Mrs Tabitha, or that indefatigable maiden is
determined to shoot at every sort of game, certain it is she has begun
to practice upon the heart of the lieutenant, who favoured us with his
company to supper.

I have many other things to say of this man of war, which I shall
communicate in a post or two; mean while, it is but reasonable that you
should be indulged with some respite from those weary lucubrations of

Yours, J. MELFORD NEWCASTLE UPON TYNE, July 10.




To Sir WATKIN PHILLIPS Bart. of Jesus college, Oxon.

DEAR PHILLIPS,

In my last I treated you with a high flavoured dish, in the character
of the Scotch lieutenant, and I must present him once more for your
entertainment. It was our fortune to feed upon him the best part of
three days; and I do not doubt that he will start again in our way
before we shall have finished our northern excursion. The day after our
meeting with him at Durham proved so tempestuous that we did not choose
to proceed on our journey; and my uncle persuaded him to stay till
the weather should clear up, giving him, at the same time, a general
invitation to our mess. The man has certainly gathered a whole budget
of shrewd observations, but he brings them forth in such an ungracious
manner as would be extremely disgusting, if it was not marked by that
characteristic oddity which never fails to attract the attention--He and
Mr Bramble discoursed, and even disputed, on different subjects in war,
policy, the belles lettres, law, and metaphysics; and sometimes they
were warmed into such altercation as seemed to threaten an abrupt
dissolution of their society; but Mr Bramble set a guard over his own
irascibility, the more vigilantly as the officer was his guest; and
when, in spite of all his efforts, he began to wax warm, the other
prudently cooled in the same proportion.

Mrs Tabitha chancing to accost her brother by the familiar diminutive
of Matt, 'Pray, sir (said the lieutenant), 'is your name Matthias?' You
must know it is one of our uncle's foibles to be ashamed of his name
Matthew, because it is puritanical; and this question chagrined him
so much, that he answered, 'No, by G-d!' in a very abrupt tone of
displeasure.--The Scot took umbrage at the manner of his reply, and
bristling up, 'If I had known (said he) that you did not care to tell
your name, I should not have asked the question--The leddy called you
Matt, and I naturally thought it was Matthias:--perhaps, it may be
Methuselah, or Metrodorus, or Metellus, or Mathurinus, or Malthinnus, or
Matamorus, or--' 'No (cried my uncle laughing), it is neither of those,
captain: my name is Matthew Bramble, at, your service.--The truth is,
have a foolish pique at the name of Matthew, because it favours of
those canting hypocrites, who, in Cromwell's time, christened all their
children by names taken from the scripture.' 'A foolish pique indeed.
(cried Mrs Tabby), and even sinful, to fall out with your name because
it is taken from holy writ.--I would have you to know, you was called
after great-uncle Matthew ap Madoc ap Meredith, esquire, of Llanwysthin,
in Montgomeryshire, justice of the quorum, and crusty ruttleorum, a
gentleman of great worth and property, descended in a strait line, by
the female side, from Llewellyn, prince of Wales.'

This genealogical anecdote seemed to make some impression upon the
North-Briton, who bowed very low to the descendant of Llewellyn, and
observed that he himself had the honour of a scriptural nomination. The
lady expressing a desire of knowing his address, he said, he designed
himself Lieutenant Obadiah Lismahago; and in order to assist her memory,
he presented her with a slip of paper inscribed with these three words,
which she repeated with great emphasis, declaring, it was one of the
most noble and sonorous names she had ever heard. He observed that
Obadiah was an adventitious appellation, derived from his
great-grandfather, who had been one of the original covenanters; but
Lismahago was the family surname, taken from a place in Scotland so called. Helikewise dropped some hints about the antiquity of his pedigree, adding,
with a smile of self-denial, Sed genus et proavos, et quoe non fecimus
ipsi, vix ea nostra voco, which quotation he explained in deference
to the ladies; and Mrs Tabitha did not fail to compliment him on his
modesty in waving the merit of his ancestry, adding, that it was the
less necessary to him, as he had such a considerable fund of his
own. She now began to glew herself to his favour with the grossest
adulation.--She expatiated upon the antiquity and virtues of the
Scottish nation, upon their valour, probity, learning, and politeness.
She even descended to encomiums on his own personal address, his
gallantry, good sense, and erudition.--She appealed to her brother,
whether the captain was not the very image of our cousin governor
Griffith. She discovered a surprising eagerness to know the particulars
of his life, and asked a thousand questions concerning his atchievements
in war; all which Mr Lismahago answered with a sort of jesuitical
reserve, affecting a reluctance to satisfy her curiosity on a subject
that concerned his own exploits.

By dint of her interrogations, however, we learned, that he and ensign
Murphy had made their escape from the French hospital at Montreal, and
taken to the woods, in hope of reaching some English settlement; but
mistaking their route, they fell in with a party of Miamis, who carried
them away in captivity. The intention of these Indians was to give one
of them as an adopted son to a venerable sachem, who had lost his own
in the course of the war, and to sacrifice the other according to the
custom of the country. Murphy, as being the younger and handsomer of the
two, was designed to fill the place of the deceased, not only as the
son of the sachem, but as the spouse of a beautiful squaw, to whom his
predecessor had been betrothed; but in passing through the different
whigwhams or villages of the Miamis, poor Murphy was so mangled by the
women and children, who have the privilege of torturing all prisoners
in their passage, that, by the time they arrived at the place of the
sachem's residence, he was rendered altogether unfit for the purposes of
marriage: it was determined therefore, in the assembly of the warriors,
that ensign Murphy should be brought to the stake, and that the lady
should be given to lieutenant Lismahago, who had likewise received his
share of torments, though they had not produced emasculation.--A joint
of one finger had been cut, or rather sawed off with a rusty knife; one
of his great toes was crushed into a mash betwixt two stones; some of
his teeth were drawn, or dug out with a crooked nail; splintered reeds
had been thrust up his nostrils and other tender parts; and the calves
of his legs had been blown up with mines of gunpowder dug in the flesh
with the sharp point of the tomahawk.

The Indians themselves allowed that Murphy died with great heroism,
singing, as his death song, the Drimmendoo, in concert with Mr
Lismahago, who was present at the solemnity. After the warriors and the
matrons had made a hearty meal upon the muscular flesh which they pared
from the victim, and had applied a great variety of tortures, which he
bore without flinching, an old lady, with a sharp knife, scooped out
one of his eyes, and put a burning coal in the socket. The pain of this
operation was so exquisite that he could not help bellowing, upon which
the audience raised a shout of exultation, and one of the warriors
stealing behind him, gave him the coup de grace with a hatchet.

Lismahago's bride, the squaw Squinkinacoosta, distinguished herself on
this occasion.--She shewed a great superiority of genius in the tortures
which she contrived and executed with her own hands.--She vied with the
stoutest warrior in eating the flesh of the sacrifice; and after all
the other females were fuddled with dram-drinking, she was not so
intoxicated but that she was able to play the game of the platter with
the conjuring sachem, and afterwards go through the ceremony of her own
wedding, which was consummated that same evening. The captain had lived
very happily with this accomplished squaw for two years, during which
she bore him a son, who is now the representative of his mother's tribe;
but, at length, to his unspeakable grief, she had died of a fever,
occasioned by eating too much raw bear, which they had killed in a
hunting excursion.

By this time, Mr Lismahago was elected sachem, acknowledged first
warrior of the Badger tribe, and dignified with the name or epithet of
Occacanastaogarora, which signifies nimble as a weasel; but all these
advantages and honours he was obliged to resign, in consequence of being
exchanged for the orator of the community, who had been taken prisoner
by the Indians that were in alliance with the English. At the peace, he
had sold out upon half pay, and was returned to Britain, with a view
to pass the rest of his life in his own country, where he hoped to
find some retreat where his slender finances would afford him a decent
subsistence. Such are the outlines of Mr Lismahago's history, to which
Tabitha did seriously incline her ear;--indeed, she seemed to be taken
with the same charms that captivated the heart of Desdemona, who loved
the Moor for the dangers he had past.

The description of poor Murphy's sufferings, which threw my sister Liddy
into a swoon, extracted some sighs from the breast of Mrs Tabby: when
she understood he had been rendered unfit for marriage, she began to
spit, and ejaculated, 'Jesus, what cruel barbarians!' and she made wry
faces at the lady's nuptial repast; but she was eagerly curious to know
the particulars of her marriage-dress; whether she wore high-breasted
stays or bodice, a robe of silk or velvet, and laces of Mechlin or
minionette--she supposed, as they were connected with the French,
she used rouge, and had her hair dressed in the Parisian fashion. The
captain would have declined giving a catagorical explanation of all
these particulars, observing, in general, that the Indians were
too tenacious of their own customs to adopt the modes of any nation
whatsoever; he said, moreover, that neither the simplicity of their
manners nor the commerce of their country, would admit of those articles
of luxury which are deemed magnificence in Europe; and that they were
too virtuous and sensible to encourage the introduction of any fashion
which might help to render them corrupt and effeminate.

These observations served only to inflame her desire of knowing the
particulars about which she had enquired; and, with all his evasion,
he could not help discovering the following circumstances--that
his princess had neither shoes, stockings, shift, nor any kind of
linen--that her bridal dress consisted of a petticoat of red bays, and a
fringed blanket, fastened about her shoulders with a copper skewer; but
of ornaments she had great plenty.--Her hair was curiously plaited, and
interwoven with bobbins of human bone--one eye-lid was painted green,
and the other yellow; the cheeks were blue, the lips white, the teeth
red, and there was a black list drawn down the middle of the forehead
as far as the tip of the nose--a couple of gaudy parrot's feathers were
stuck through the division of the nostrils--there was a blue stone set
in the chin, her ear-rings consisted of two pieces of hickery, of the
size and shape of drum-sticks--her arms and legs were adorned with
bracelets of wampum--her breast glittered with numerous strings of glass
beads--she wore a curious pouch, or pocket of woven grass, elegantly
painted with various colours--about her neck was hung the fresh scalp
of a Mohawk warrior, whom her deceased lover had lately slain in
battle--and, finally, she was anointed from head to foot with bear's
grease, which sent forth a most agreeable odour.

One would imagine that these paraphernalia would not have been much
admired by a modern fine lady; but Mrs Tabitha was resolved to approve
of all the captains connexions.--She wished, indeed, the squaw had been
better provided with linen; but she owned there was much taste and
fancy in her ornaments; she made no doubt, therefore, that madam
Squinkinacoosta was a young lady of good sense and rare accomplishments,
and a good christian at bottom. Then she asked whether his consort had
been high church or low-church, presbyterian or anabaptist, or had been
favoured with any glimmering of the new light of the gospel? When he
confessed that she and her whole nation were utter strangers to the
christian faith, she gazed at him with signs of astonishment, and
Humphry Clinker, who chanced to be in the room, uttered a hollow groan.

After some pause, 'In the name of God, captain Lismahago (cried she),
what religion do they profess?' 'As to religion, madam (answered
the lieutenant), it is among those Indians a matter of great
simplicity--they never heard of any Alliance between Church and
State.--They, in general, worship two contending principles; one the
Fountain of all Good, the other the source of all evil. The common
people there, as in other countries, run into the absurdities of
superstition; but sensible men pay adoration to a Supreme Being, who
created and sustains the universe.' 'O! what pity (exclaimed the pious
Tabby), that some holy man has not been inspired to go and convert these
poor heathens!'

The lieutenant told her, that while he resided among them, two French
missionaries arrived, in order to convert them to the catholic religion;
but when they talked of mysteries and revelations, which they could
neither explain nor authenticate, and called in the evidence of miracles
which they believed upon hearsay; when they taught that the Supreme
Creator of Heaven and Earth had allowed his only Son, his own equal in
power and glory, to enter the bowels of a woman, to be born as a
human creature, to be insulted, flagellated, and even executed as a
malefactor; when they pretended to create God himself, to swallow,
digest, revive, and multiply him ad infinitum, by the help of a little
flour and water, the Indians were shocked at the impiety of their
presumption.--They were examined by the assembly of the sachems
who desired them to prove the divinity of their mission by some
miracle.--They answered, that it was not in their power.--'If you were
really sent by Heaven for our conversion (said one of the sachems), you
would certainly have some supernatural endowments, at least you would
have the gift of tongues, in order to explain your doctrine to the
different nations among which you are employed; but you are so ignorant
of our language, that you cannot express yourselves even on the most
trifling subjects.' In a word, the assembly were convinced of their
being cheats, and even suspected them of being spies: they ordered them
a bag of Indian corn apiece, and appointed a guide to conduct them to
the frontiers; but the missionaries having more zeal than discretion,
refused to quit the vineyard.--They persisted in saying mass, in
preaching, baptizing, and squabbling with the conjurers, or priests
of the country, till they had thrown the whole community into
confusion.--Then the assembly proceeded to try them as impious
impostors, who represented the Almighty as a trifling, weak, capricious
being, and pretended to make, unmake, and reproduce him at pleasure;
they were, therefore, convicted of blasphemy and sedition, and condemned
to the stale, where they died singing Salve regina, in a rapture of joy,
for the crown of martyrdom which they had thus obtained.

In the course of this conversation, lieutenant Lismahago dropt some
hints by which it appeared he himself was a free-thinker. Our aunt
seemed to be startled at certain sarcasms he threw out against the creed
of saint Athanasius--He dwelt much upon the words, reason, philosophy,
and contradiction in terms--he bid defiance to the eternity of
hell-fire; and even threw such squibs at the immortality of the soul, as
singed a little the whiskers of Mrs Tabitha's faith; for, by this
time she began to look upon Lismahago as a prodigy of learning and
sagacity.--In short, he could be no longer insensible to the advances
she made towards his affection; and although there was something
repulsive in his nature, he overcame it so far as to make some return
to her civilities.--Perhaps, he thought it would be no bad scheme, in
a superannuated lieutenant on half-pay, to effect a conjunction with an
old maid, who, in all probability, had fortune enough to keep him easy
and comfortable in the fag-end of his days--An ogling correspondence
forthwith commenced between this amiable pair of originals--He began
to sweeten the natural acidity of his discourse with the treacle of
compliment and commendation--He from time to time offered her snuff, of
which he himself took great quantities, and even made her a present of a
purse of silk grass, woven by the hands of the amiable Squinkinacoosta,
who had used it as a shot-pouch in her hunting expeditions.

From Doncaster northwards, all the windows of all the inns are scrawled
with doggeral rhimes, in abuse of the Scotch nation; and what surprised
me very much, I did not perceive one line written in the way of
recrimination--Curious to hear what Lismahago would say on this subject,
I pointed out to him a very scurrilous epigram against his countrymen,
which was engraved on one of the windows of the parlour where we
sat.--He read it with the most starched composure; and when I asked his
opinion of the poetry, 'It is vara terse and vara poignant (said he);
but with the help of a wat dish-clout, it might be rendered more clear
and parspicuous.--I marvel much that some modern wit has not published a
collection of these essays under the title of the Glaziers Triumph over
Sawney the Scot--I'm persuaded it would be a vara agreeable offering to
the patriots of London and Westminster.' When I expressed some surprize
that the natives of Scotland, who travel this way, had not broke all the
windows upon the road, 'With submission (replied the lieutenant), that
were but shallow policy--it would only serve to make the satire more
cutting and severe; and I think it is much better to let it stand in the
window, than have it presented in the reckoning.'

My uncle's jaws began to quiver with indignation.--He said, the
scribblers of such infamous stuff deserved to be scourged at the cart's
tail for disgracing their country with such monuments of malice and
stupidity.--'These vermin (said he) do not consider, that they are
affording their fellow subjects, whom they abuse, continual matter
of self-gratulation, as well as the means of executing the most manly
vengeance that can be taken for such low, illiberal attacks. For my
part, I admire the philosophic forbearance of the Scots, as much as I
despise the insolence of those wretched libellers, which is akin to
the arrogance of the village cock, who never crows but upon his own
dunghill.' The captain, with an affectation of candour, observed, that
men of illiberal minds were produced in every soil; that in supposing
those were the sentiments of the English in general, he should pay
too great a compliment to is own country, which was not of consequence
enough to attract the envy of such a flourishing and powerful people.

Mrs Tabby broke forth again in praise of his moderation, and declared
that Scotland was the soil which produced every virtue under heaven.
When Lismahago took his leave for the night, she asked her brother
if the captain was not the prettiest gentleman he had ever seen; and
whether there was not something wonderfully engaging in his aspect?--Mr
Bramble having eyed her sometime in silence, 'Sister (said he), the
lieutenant is, for aught I know, an honest man and a good officer--he
has a considerable share of understanding, and a title to more
encouragement than he seems to have met with in life; but I cannot, with
a safe conscience, affirm, that he is the prettiest gentleman I ever
saw; neither can I descern any engaging charm in his countenance, which,
I vow to God, is, on the contrary, very hard-favoured and forbidding.'

I have endeavoured to ingratiate myself with this North-Briton, who is
really a curiosity; but he has been very shy of my conversation ever
since I laughed at his asserting that the English tongue was spoke with
more propriety at Edinburgh than at London. Looking at me with a double
squeeze of souring in his aspect, 'If the old definition be true (said
he), that risibility is the distinguishing characteristic of a rational
creature, the English are the most distinguished for rationality of any
people I ever knew.' I owned, that the English were easily struck with
any thing that appeared ludicrous, and apt to laugh accordingly; but it
did not follow, that, because they were more given to laughter, they had
more rationality than their neighbours: I said, such an inference
would be an injury to the Scots, who were by no means defective in
rationality, though generally supposed little subject to the impressions
of humour.

The captain answered, that this supposition must have been deduced
either from their conversation or their compositions, of which the
English could not possibly judge with precision, as they did not
understand the dialect used by the Scots in common discourse, as well
as in their works of humour. When I desired to know what those works
of humour were, he mentioned a considerable number of pieces, which
he insisted were equal in point of humour to any thing extant in any
language dead or living--He, in particular, recommended a collection of
detached poems, in two small volumes, intituled, The Ever-Green, and
the works of Allan Ramsay, which I intend to provide myself with at
Edinburgh.--He observed, that a North-Briton is seen to a disadvantage
in an English company, because he speaks in a dialect that they can't
relish, and in a phraseology which they don't understand.--He therefore
finds himself under a restraint, which is a great enemy to wit and
humour.--These are faculties which never appear in full lustre, but when
the mind is perfectly at ease, and, as an excellent writer says, enjoys
her elbow-room.

He proceeded to explain his assertion that the English language was
spoken with greater propriety at Edinburgh than in London. He said, what
we generally called the Scottish dialect was, in fact, true, genuine old
English, with a mixture of some French terms and idioms, adopted in a
long intercourse betwixt the French and Scotch nations; that the modern
English, from affectation and false refinement, had weakened, and even
corrupted their language, by throwing out the guttural sounds, altering
the pronunciation and the quantity, and disusing many words and terms
of great significance. In consequence of these innovations, the works
of our best poets, such as Chaucer, Spenser, and even Shakespeare, were
become, in many parts, unintelligible to the natives of South Britain,
whereas the Scots, who retain the antient language, understand them
without the help of a glossary. 'For instance (said he), how have
your commentators been puzzled by the following expression in the
Tempest--He's gentle and not fearful: as if it was a paralogism to say,
that being gentle, he must of course be courageous: but the truth is,
one of the original meanings, if not the sole meaning, of that word was,
noble, high-minded; and to this day, a Scotch woman, in the situation of
the young lady in the Tempest, would express herself nearly in the same
terms--Don't provoke him; for being gentle, that is, high-spirited, he
won't tamely bear an insult. Spenser, in the very first stanza of his
Fairy Queen, says,

   A gentle knight was pricking on the plain;
   Which knight, far from being tame and fearful, was so stout that
   Nothing did he dread, but ever was ydrad.

To prove that we had impaired the energy of our language by false
refinement, he mentioned the following words, which, though widely
different in signification, are pronounced exactly in the same manner
wright, write, right, rite; but among the Scots, these words are as
different in pronunciation, as they are in meaning and orthography;
and this is the case with many others which he mentioned by way of
illustration.--He, moreover, took notice, that we had (for what reason
he could never learn) altered the sound of our vowels from that which is
retained by all the nations in Europe; an alteration which rendered
the language extremely difficult to foreigners, and made it
almost impracticable to lay down general rules for orthography and
pronunciation. Besides, the vowels were no longer simple sounds in
the mouth of an Englishman, who pronounced both i and u as dipthongs.
Finally, he affirmed, that we mumbled our speech with our lips and
teeth, and ran the words together without pause or distinction, in such
a manner, that a foreigner, though he understood English tolerably well,
was often obliged to have recourse to a Scotchman to explain what a
native of England had said in his own language.

The truth of this remark was confirmed by Mr Bramble from his own
experience; but he accounted for it on another principle. He said,
the same observation would hold in all languages; that a Swiss talking
French was more easily understood than a Parisian, by a foreigner who
had not made himself master of the language; because every language
had its peculiar recitative, and it would always require more pains,
attention, and practice, to acquire both the words and the music, than
to learn the words only; and yet no body would deny, that the one
was imperfect without the other: he therefore apprehended, that the
Scotchman and the Swiss were better understood by learners, because they
spoke the words only, without the music, which they could not rehearse.
One would imagine this check might have damped the North Briton; but it
served only to agitate his humour for disputation.--He said, if every
nation had its own recitative or music, the Scots had theirs, and the
Scotchman who had not yet acquired the cadence of the English, would
naturally use his own in speaking their language; therefore, if he
was better understood than the native, his recitative must be more
intelligible than that of the English; of consequence, the dialect of
the Scots had an advantage over that of their fellow-subjects, and this
was another strong presumption that the modern English had corrupted
their language in the article of pronunciation.

The lieutenant was, by this time, become so polemical, that every time
he opened his mouth out flew a paradox, which he maintained with all the
enthusiasm of altercation; but all his paradoxes favoured strong of a
partiality for his own country. He undertook to prove that poverty was
a blessing to a nation; that oatmeal was preferable to wheat-flour; and
that the worship of Cloacina, in temples which admitted both sexes, and
every rank of votaries promiscuously, was a filthy species of idolatry
that outraged every idea of delicacy and decorum. I did not so much
wonder at his broaching these doctrines, as at the arguments, equally
whimsical and ingenious, which he adduced in support of them.

In fine, lieutenant Lismahago is a curiosity which I have not yet
sufficiently perused; and therefore I shall be sorry when we lose his
company, though, God knows, there is nothing very amiable in his manner
or disposition.--As he goes directly to the south-west division of
Scotland, and we proceed in the road to Berwick, we shall part tomorrow
at a place called Feltonbridge; and, I dare say, this separation will
be very grievous to our aunt Mrs Tabitha, unless she has received some
flattering assurance of his meeting her again. If I fail in my purpose
of entertaining you with these unimportant occurrences, they will at
least serve as exercises of patience, for which you are indebted to


Yours always, J. MELFORD MORPETH, July 13.




To Dr LEWIS.

DEAR DOCTOR,

I have now reached the northern extremity of England, and see, close to
my chamber-window, the Tweed gliding through the arches of that bridge
which connects this suburb to the town of Berwick.--Yorkshire you have
seen, and therefore I shall say nothing of that opulent province.
The city of Durham appears like a confused heap of stones and brick,
accumulated so as to cover a mountain, round which a river winds its
brawling course. The Streets are generally narrow, dark, and unpleasant,
and many of them almost impassible in consequence of their declivity.
The cathedral is a huge gloomy pile; but the clergy are well lodged.--
The bishop lives in a princely manner--the golden prebends keep
plentiful tables--and, I am told, there is some good sociable company in
the place; but the country, when viewed from the top of Gateshead-Fell,
which extends to Newcastle, exhibits the highest scene of cultivation
that ever I beheld. As for Newcastle, it lies mostly in a bottom, on the
banks of the Tyne, and makes an appearance still more disagreeable than
that of Durham; but it is rendered populous and rich by industry and
commerce; and the country lying on both sides the river, above the town,
yields a delightful prospect of agriculture and plantation. Morpeth and
Alnwick are neat, pretty towns, and this last is famous for the castle
which has belonged so many ages to the noble house of Piercy, earls of
Northumberland.--It is, doubtless, a large edifice, containing a great
number of apartments, and stands in a commanding situation; but the
strength of it seems to have consisted not so much in its site, or the
manner in which it is fortified, as in the valour of its defendants.

Our adventures since we left Scarborough, are scarce worth reciting;
and yet I must make you acquainted with my sister Tabby's progress in
husband-hunting, after her disappointments at Bath and London. She had
actually begun to practise upon a certain adventurer, who was in fact
a highwayman by profession; but he had been used to snares much more
dangerous than any she could lay, and escaped accordingly. Then she
opened her batteries upon an old weather-beaten Scotch lieutenant,
called Lismahago, who joined us at Durham, and is, I think, one of the
most singular personages I ever encountered--His manner is as harsh
as his countenance; but his peculiar turn of thinking, and his pack of
knowledge made up of the remnants of rarities, rendered his conversation
desirable, in spite of his pedantry and ungracious address. I have often
met with a crab-apple in a hedge, which I have been tempted to eat for
its flavour, even while I was disgusted by its austerity. The spirit of
contradiction is naturally so strong in Lismahago, that I believe in
my conscience he has rummaged, and read, and studied with indefatigable
attention, in order to qualify himself to refute established maxims, and
thus raise trophies for the gratification of polemical pride.--Such is
the asperity of his self-conceit, that he will not even acquiesce in a
transient compliment made to his own individual in particular, or to his
country in general.

When I observed, that he must have read a vast number of books to be
able to discourse on such a variety of subjects, he declared he had read
little or nothing, and asked how he should find books among the woods
of America, where he had spent the greatest part of his life. My nephew
remarking that the Scots in general were famous for their learning, he
denied the imputation, and defied him to prove it from their works--'The
Scots (said he) have a slight tincture of letters, with which they make
a parade among people who are more illiterate than themselves; but they
may be said to float on the surface of science, and they have made very
small advances in the useful arts.' 'At least (cried Tabby), all
the world allows that the Scots behaved gloriously in fighting and
conquering the savages of America.' 'I can assure you, madam, you have
been misinformed (replied the lieutenant); in that continent the
Scots did nothing more than their duty, nor was there one corps in his
majesty's service that distinguished itself more than another.--Those
who affected to extol the Scots for superior merit, were no friends to
that nation.'

Though he himself made free with his countrymen, he would not suffer
any other person to glance a sarcasm at them with impunity. One of the
company chancing to mention lord B--'s inglorious peace, the lieutenant
immediately took up the cudgels in his lordship's favour, and
argued very strenuously to prove that it was the most honourable and
advantageous peace that England had ever made since the foundation of
the monarchy.--Nay, between friends, he offered such reasons on this
subject, that I was really confounded, if not convinced.--He would not
allow that the Scots abounded above their proportion in the army and
navy of Great-Britain, or that the English had any reason to say his
countrymen had met with extraordinary encouragement in the service.
'When a South and North-Briton (said he) are competitors for a place
or commission, which is in the disposal of an English minister or an
English general, it would be absurd to suppose that the preference will
not be given to the native of England, who has so many advantages over
his rival.--First and foremost, he has in his favour that laudable
partiality, which, Mr Addison says, never fails to cleave to the heart
of an Englishman; secondly, he has more powerful connexions, and a
greater share of parliamentary interest, by which those contests are
generally decided; and lastly, he has a greater command of money to
smooth the way to his success. For my own part (said he), I know no
Scotch officer, who has risen in the army above the rank of a subaltern,
without purchasing every degree of preferment either with money or
recruits; but I know many gentlemen of that country, who, for want of
money and interest, have grown grey in the rank of lieutenants; whereas
very few instances of this ill-fortune are to be found among the natives
of South-Britain.--Not that I would insinuate that my countrymen have
the least reason to complain. Preferment in the service, like success
in any other branch of traffic, will naturally favour those who have
the greatest stock of cash and credit, merit and capacity being supposed
equal on all sides.'

But the most hardy of all this original's positions were these: That
commerce would, sooner or later, prove the ruin of every nation, where
it flourishes to any extent--that the parliament was the rotten part of
the British constitution--that the liberty of the press was a national
evil--and that the boasted institution of juries, as managed in England,
was productive of shameful perjury and flagrant injustice. He observed,
that traffick was an enemy to all the liberal passions of the soul,
founded on the thirst of lucre, a sordid disposition to take advantage
of the necessities of our fellow creatures.--He affirmed, the nature
of commerce was such, that it could not be fixed or perpetuated, but,
having flowed to a certain height, would immediately begin to ebb, and
so continue till the channels should be left almost dry; but there
was no instance of the tide's rising a second time to any considerable
influx in the same nation. Mean while the sudden affluence occasioned
by trade, forced open all the sluices of luxury and overflowed the land
with every species of profligacy and corruption; a total pravity of
manners would ensue, and this must be attended with bankruptcy and ruin.
He observed of the parliament, that the practice of buying boroughs,
and canvassing for votes, was an avowed system of venality, already
established on the ruins of principle, integrity, faith, and good order,
in consequence of which the elected and the elector, and, in short, the
whole body of the people, were equally and universally contaminated and
corrupted. He affirmed, that of a parliament thus constituted, the crown
would always have influence enough to secure a great majority in its
dependence, from the great number of posts, places, and pensions it
had to bestow; that such a parliament would (as it had already done)
lengthen the term of its sitting and authority, whenever the prince
should think it for his interest to continue the representatives, for,
without doubt, they had the same right to protect their authority ad
infinitum, as they had to extend it from three to seven years.--With a
parliament, therefore, dependent upon the crown, devoted to the prince,
and supported by a standing army, garbled and modelled for the purpose,
any king of England may, and probably some ambitious sovereign will,
totally overthrow all the bulwarks of the constitution; for it is not
to be supposed that a prince of high spirit will tamely submit to be
thwarted in all his measures, abused and insulted by a populace of
unbridled ferocity, when he has it in his power to crush all opposition
under his feet with the concurrence of the legislature. He said, he
should always consider the liberty of the press as a national evil,
while it enabled the vilest reptile to soil the lustre of the most
shining merit, and furnished the most infamous incendiary with the means
of disturbing the peace and destroying the good order of the community.
He owned, however, that under due restrictions, it would be a valuable
privilege; but affirmed, that at present there was no law in England
sufficient to restrain it within proper bounds.

With respect to juries, he expressed himself to this effect:--juries
are generally composed of illiterate plebeians, apt to be mistaken,
easily misled, and open to sinister influence; for if either of the
parties to be tried, can gain over one of the twelve jurors, he has
secured the verdict in his favour; the juryman thus brought over will,
in despight of all evidence and conviction, generally hold out till his
fellows are fatigued, and harassed, and starved into concurrence; in
which case the verdict is unjust, and the jurors are all perjured: but
cases will often occur, when the jurors are really divided in opinion,
and each side is convinced in opposition to the other; but no verdict
will be received, unless they are unanimous, and they are all bound, not
only in conscience, but by oath, to judge and declare according to their
conviction.--What then will be the consequence?--They must either
starve in company, or one side must sacrifice their conscience to their
convenience, and join in a verdict which they believe to be false. This
absurdity is avoided in Sweden, where a bare majority is sufficient; and
in Scotland, where two thirds of the jury are required to concur in the
verdict.

You must not imagine that all these deductions were made on his part,
without contradictions on mine.--No--the truth is, I found myself piqued
in point of honour, at his pretending to be so much wiser than his
neighbours.--I questioned all his assertions, started innumerable
objections, argued and wrangled with uncommon perseverance, and grew
very warm, and even violent, in the debate.--Sometimes he was puzzled,
and once or twice, I think, fairly refuted; but from those falls he rose
again, like Antaeus, with redoubled vigour, till at length I was tired,
exhausted, and really did not know how to proceed, when luckily he
dropped a hint, by which he discovered he had been bred to the law;
a confession which enabled me to retire from the dispute with a good
grace, as it could not be supposed that a man like me, who had been bred
to nothing, should be able to cope with a veteran in his own profession.
I believe, however, that I shall for some time continue to chew the cud
of reflection upon many observations which this original discharged.

Whether our sister Tabby was really struck with his conversation, or is
resolved to throw at every thing she meets in the shape of a man, till
she can fasten the matrimonial noose, certain it is, she has taken
desperate strides towards the affection of Lismahago, who cannot be said
to have met her half way, though he does not seem altogether insensible
to her civilities.--She insinuated more than once how happy we should be
to have his company through that part of Scotland which we proposed
to visit, till at length he plainly told us, that his road was totally
different from that which we intended to take; that, for his part, his
company would be of very little service to us in our progress, as he was
utterly unacquainted with the country, which he had left in his early
youth, consequently, he could neither direct us in our enquiries, nor
introduce us to any family of distinction. He said, he was stimulated
by an irresistible impulse to revisit the paternus lar, or patria domus,
though he expected little satisfaction, inasmuch as he understood that
his nephew, the present possessor, was but ill qualified to support the
honour of the family.--He assured us, however, as we design to return by
the west road, that he will watch our motions, and endeavour to pay his
respects to us at Dumfries.--Accordingly he took his leave of us at a
place half way betwixt Morpeth and Alnwick, and pranced away in great
state, mounted on a tall, meagre, raw-boned, shambling grey gelding,
without e'er a tooth in his head, the very counter-part of the rider;
and, indeed, the appearance of the two was so picturesque, that I would
give twenty guineas to have them tolerably presented on canvas.

Northumberland is a fine county, extending to the Tweed, which is a
pleasant pastoral stream; but you will be surprised when I tell you
that the English side of that river is neither so well cultivated nor
so populous as the other.--The farms are thinly scattered, the lands
uninclosed, and scarce a gentleman's seat is to be seen in some miles
from the Tweed; whereas the Scots are advanced in crowds to the very
brink of the river, so that you may reckon above thirty good houses, in
the compass of a few miles, belonging to proprietors whose ancestors had
fortified castles in the same situations, a circumstance that shews what
dangerous neighbours the Scots must have formerly been to the northern
counties of England.

Our domestic oeconomy continues on the old footing.--My sister Tabby
still adheres to methodism, and had the benefit of a sermon at Wesley's
meeting in Newcastle; but I believe the Passion of love has in some
measure abated the fervour of devotion both in her and her woman,
Mrs Jenkins, about whose good graces there has been a violent contest
betwixt my nephew's valet, Mr Dutton, and my man, Humphry Clinker.--Jery
has been obliged to interpose his authority to keep the peace, and to
him I have left the discussion of that important affair, which had like
to have kindled the flames of discord in the family of

Yours always, MATT. BRAMBLE TWEEDMOUTH, July 15.




To Sir WATKIN PHILLIPS, Bart. at Oxon.

DEAR WAT,

In my two last you had so much of Lismahago, that I suppose you are
glad he is gone off the stage for the present.--I must now descend
to domestic occurrences.--Love, it seems, is resolved to assert his
dominion over all the females of our family.--After having practised
upon poor Liddy's heart, and played strange vagaries with our aunt
Mrs Tabitha, he began to run riot in the affections of her woman, Mrs
Winifred Jenkins, whom I have had occasion to mention more than once in
the course of our memoirs. Nature intended Jenkins for something very
different from the character of her mistress; yet custom and habit have
effected a wonderful resemblance betwixt them in many particulars. Win,
to be sure, is much younger and more agreeable in her person; she is
likewise tender-hearted and benevolent, qualities for which her mistress
is by no means remarkable, no more than she is for being of a timorous
disposition, and much subject to fits of the mother, which are the
infirmities of Win's constitution: but then she seems to have adopted
Mrs Tabby's manner with her cast cloaths.--She dresses and endeavours
to look like her mistress, although her own looks are much more
engaging.--She enters into her scheme of oeconomy, learns her phrases,
repeats her remarks, imitates her stile in scolding the inferior
servants, and, finally, subscribes implicitly to her system of
devotion.--This, indeed, she found the more agreeable, as it was in a
great measure introduced and confirmed by the ministry of Clinker,
with whose personal merit she seems to have been struck ever since he
exhibited the pattern of his naked skin at Marlborough.

Nevertheless, though Humphry had this double hank upon her inclinations,
and exerted all his power to maintain the conquest he had made, he found
it impossible to guard it on the side of vanity, where poor Win was as
frail as any female in the kingdom. In short, my rascal Dutton professed
himself her admirer, and, by dint of his outlandish qualifications,
threw his rival Clinker out of the saddle of her heart. Humphry may be
compared to an English pudding, composed of good wholesome flour and
suet, and Dutton to a syllabub or iced froth, which, though agreeable
to the taste, has nothing solid or substantial. The traitor not only
dazzled her, with his second-hand finery, but he fawned, and flattered,
and cringed--he taught her to take rappee, and presented her with
a snuff-box of papier mache--he supplied her with a powder for her
teeth--he mended her complexion, and he dressed her hair in the Paris
fashion--he undertook to be her French master and her dancing-master,
as well as friseur, and thus imperceptibly wound himself into her good
graces. Clinker perceived the progress he had made, and repined in
secret.--He attempted to open her eyes in the way of exhortation, and
finding it produced no effect had recourse to prayer. At Newcastle,
while he attended Mrs Tabby to the methodist meeting his rival
accompanied Mrs Jenkins to the play. He was dressed in a silk coat, made
at Paris for his former master, with a tawdry waistcoat of tarnished
brocade; he wore his hair in a great bag with a huge solitaire, and a
long sword dangled from his thigh. The lady was all of a flutter with
faded lutestring, washed gauze, and ribbons three times refreshed; but
she was most remarkable for the frisure of her head, which rose, like
a pyramid, seven inches above the scalp, and her face was primed and
patched from the chin up to the eyes; nay, the gallant himself had
spared neither red nor white in improving the nature of his own
complexion. In this attire, they walked together through the high street
to the theatre, and as they passed for players ready dressed for
acting, they reached it unmolested; but as it was still light when they
returned, and by that time the people had got information of their real
character and condition, they hissed and hooted all the way, and Mrs
Jenkins was all bespattered with dirt, as well as insulted with
the opprobrious name of painted Jezabel, so that her fright and
mortification threw her into an hysteric fit the moment she came home.

Clinker was so incensed at Dutton, whom he considered as the cause of
her disgrace, that he upbraided him severely for having turned the
poor woman's brain. The other affected to treat him with contempt, and
mistaking his forbearance for want of courage, threatened to horse-whip
him into good manners. Humphry then came to me, humbly begging I
would give him leave to chastise my servant for his insolence--'He has
challenged me to fight him at sword's point (said he); but I might as
well challenge him to make a horse-shoe, or a plough iron; for I know no
more of the one than he does of the other.--Besides, it doth not become
servants to use those weapons, or to claim the privilege of gentlemen
to kill one another when they fall out; moreover, I would not have
his blood upon my conscience for ten thousand times the profit or
satisfaction I should get by his death; but if your honour won't be
angry, I'll engage to gee 'en a good drubbing, that, may hap, will do
'en service, and I'll take care it shall do 'en no harm.' I said, I had
no objection to what he proposed, provided he could manage matters so as
not to be found the aggressor, in case Dutton should prosecute him for
an assault and battery.

Thus licensed, he retired; and that same evening easily provoked
his rival to strike the first blow, which Clinker returned with such
interest that he was obliged to call for quarter, declaring, at the same
time, that he would exact severe and bloody satisfaction the moment we
should pass the border, when he could run him through the body without
fear of the consequence.--This scene passed in presence of lieutenant
Lismahago, who encouraged Clinker to hazard a thrust of cold iron with
his antagonist. 'Cold iron (cried Humphry) I shall never use against
the life of any human creature; but I am so far from being afraid of
his cold iron, that I shall use nothing in my defence but a good cudgel,
which shall always be at his service.' In the mean time, the fair
cause of this contest, Mrs Winifred Jenkins, seemed overwhelmed with
affliction, and Mr Clinker acted much on the reserve, though he did not
presume to find fault with her conduct.

The dispute between the two rivals was soon brought to a very unexpected
issue. Among our fellow-lodgers at Berwick, was a couple from London,
bound to Edinburgh, on the voyage of matrimony. The female was the
daughter and heiress of a pawnbroker deceased, who had given her
guardians the slip, and put herself under the tuition of a tall
Hibernian, who had conducted her thus far in quest of a clergyman to
unite them in marriage, without the formalities required by the law
of England. I know not how the lover had behaved on the road, so as to
decline in the favour of his inamorata; but, in all probability, Dutton
perceived a coldness on her side, which encouraged him to whisper,
it was a pity she should have cast affections upon a taylor, which he
affirmed the Irishman to be. This discovery completed her disgust, of
which my man taking the advantage, began to recommend himself to her
good graces, and the smooth-tongued rascal found no difficulty to
insinuate himself into the place of her heart, from which the other had
been discarded--Their resolution was immediately taken. In the morning,
before day, while poor Teague lay snoring a-bed, his indefatigable rival
ordered a post-chaise, and set out with the lady for Coldstream, a few
miles up the Tweed, where there was a parson who dealt in this branch of
commerce, and there they were noosed, before the Irishman ever dreamt
of the matter. But when he got up at six o'clock, and found the bird was
flown, he made such a noise as alarmed the whole house. One of the first
persons he encountered, was the postilion returned from Coldstream,
where he had been witness to the marriage, and over and above an
handsome gratuity, had received a bride's favour, which he now wore in
his cap--When the forsaken lover understood they were actually married,
and set out for London; and that Dutton had discovered to the lady, that
he (the Hibernian) was a taylor, he had like to have run distracted. He
tore the ribbon from the fellow's cap, and beat it about his ears.
He swore he would pursue him to the gates of hell, and ordered
a post-chaise and four to be got ready as soon as possible; but,
recollecting that his finances would not admit of this way of
travelling, he was obliged to countermand this order.

For my part, I knew nothing at all of what had happened, till the
postilion brought me the keys of my trunk and portmanteau, which he had
received from Dutton, who sent me his respects, hoping I would excuse
him for his abrupt departure, as it was a step upon which his fortune
depended. Before I had time to make my uncle acquainted with this
event, the Irishman burst into my chamber, without any introduction,
exclaiming,--'By my soul, your sarvant has robbed me of five
thousand pounds, and I'll have satisfaction, if I should be hanged
tomorrow.'--When I asked him who he was, 'My name (said he) is Master
Macloughlin but it should be Leighlin Oneale, for I am come from
Tir-Owen the Great; and so I am as good a gentleman as any in Ireland;
and that rogue, your sarvant, said I was a taylor, which was as big
a lie as if he had called me the pope--I'm a man of fortune, and have
spent all I had; and so being in distress, Mr Coshgrave, the fashioner
in Shuffolk-street, tuck me out, and made me his own private shecretary:
by the same token, I was the last he bailed; for his friends obliged him
to tie himself up, that he would bail no more above ten pounds; for why,
becaase as how, he could not refuse any body that asked, and therefore
in time would have robbed himself of his whole fortune, and, if he had
lived long at that rate, must have died bankrupt very soon and so I
made my addresses to Miss Skinner, a young lady of five thousand pounds
fortune, who agreed to take me for better nor worse; and, to be sure,
this day would have put me in possession, if it had not been for that
rogue, your sarvant, who came like a tief, and stole away my property,
and made her believe I was a taylor; and that she was going to marry the
ninth part of a man: but the devil burn my soul, if ever I catch him on
the mountains of Tulloghobegly, if I don't shew him that I'm nine times
as good a man as he, or e'er a bug of his country.'

When he had rung out his first alarm, I told him I was sorry he had
allowed himself to be so jockied; but it was no business of mine; and
that the fellow who robbed him of his bride, had likewise robbed me of
my servant--'Didn't I tell you then (cried he) that Rogue was his true
Christian name.--Oh if I had but one fair trust with him upon the sod,
I'd give him lave to brag all the rest of his life.'

My uncle hearing the noise, came in, and being informed of this
adventure, began to comfort Mr Oneale for the lady's elopement;
observing that he seemed to have had a lucky escape, that it was better
she should elope before, than after marriage--The Hibernian was of a
very different opinion. He said, 'If he had been once married, she might
have eloped as soon as she pleased; he would have taken care that she
should not have carried her fortune along with her--Ah (said he) she's
a Judas Iscariot, and has betrayed me with a kiss; and, like Judas, she
carried the bag, and has not left me money enough to bear my expences
back to London; and so I'm come to this pass, and the rogue that was
the occasion of it has left you without a sarvant, you may put me in his
place; and by Jasus, it is the best thing you can do.'--I begged to be
excused, declaring I could put up with any inconvenience, rather than
treat as a footman the descendant of Tir-Owen the Great. I advised
him to return to his friend, Mr Cosgrave, and take his passage from
Newcastle by sea, towards which I made him a small present, and he
retired, seemingly resigned to his evil fortune. I have taken upon trial
a Scotchman, called Archy M'Alpin, an old soldier, whose last master, a
colonel, lately died at Berwick. The fellow is old and withered; but he
has been recommended to me for his fidelity, by Mrs Humphreys, a very
good sort of a woman, who keeps the inn at Tweedmouth, and is much
respected by all the travellers on this road.

Clinker, without doubt, thinks himself happy in the removal of a
dangerous rival, and he is too good a Christian, to repine at Dutton's
success. Even Mrs Jenkins will have reason to congratulate herself upon
this event, when she cooly reflects upon the matter; for, howsoever she
was forced from her poise for a season, by snares laid for her vanity,
Humphry is certainly the north-star to which the needle of her affection
would have pointed at the long run. At present, the same vanity is
exceedingly mortified, upon finding herself abandoned by her new
admirer, in favour of another inamorata. She received the news with a
violent burst of laughter, which soon brought on a fit of crying; and
this gave the finishing blow to the patience of her mistress, which had
held out beyond all expectation. She now opened all those floodgates of
reprehension, which had been shut so long. She not only reproached
her with her levity and indiscretion, but attacked her on the score
of religion, declaring roundly that she was in a state of apostacy
and reprobation; and finally, threatened to send her a packing at this
extremity of the kingdom. All the family interceded for poor Winifred,
not even excepting her slighted swain, Mr Clinker, who, on his knees,
implored and obtained her pardon.

There was, however, another consideration that gave Mrs Tabitha some
disturbance. At Newcastle, the servants had been informed by some
wag, that there was nothing to eat in Scotland, but oat-meal and
sheep's-heads; and lieutenant Lismahago being consulted, what he said
served rather to confirm than to refute the report. Our aunt being
apprised of this circumstance, very gravely advised her brother to
provide a sumpter horse with store of hams, tongues, bread, biscuit, and
other articles for our subsistence, in the course of our peregrination,
and Mr Bramble as gravely replied, that he would take the hint into
consideration: but, finding no such provision was made, she now revived
the proposal, observing that there was a tolerable market at Berwick,
where we might be supplied; and that my man's horse would serve as a
beast of burthen--The 'squire, shrugging his shoulders, eyed her askance
with a look of ineffable contempt: and, after some pause, 'Sister (said
he), I can hardly persuade myself you are serious.' She was so little
acquainted with the geography of the island, that she imagined we could
not go to Scotland but by sea; and, after we had passed through the town
of Berwick, when he told her we were upon Scottish ground, she could
hardly believe the assertion--If the truth must be told, the South
Britons in general are woefully ignorant in this particular. What,
between want of curiosity, and traditional sarcasms, the effect of
ancient animosity, the people at the other end of the island know as
little of Scotland as of Japan.

If I had never been in Wales, I should have been more struck with the
manifest difference in appearance betwixt the peasants and commonalty
on different sides of the Tweed. The boors of Northumberland are
lusty fellows, fresh complexioned, cleanly, and well cloathed; but the
labourers in Scotland are generally lank, lean, hard-featured, sallow,
soiled, and shabby, and their little pinched blue caps have a beggarly
effect. The cattle are much in the same stile with their drivers,
meagre, stunted, and ill equipt. When I talked to my uncle on this
subject, he said, 'Though all the Scottish hinds would not bear to be
compared with those of the rich counties of South Britain, they would
stand very well in competition with the peasants of France, Italy, and
Savoy--not to mention the mountaineers of Wales, and the red-shanks of
Ireland.'

We entered Scotland by a frightful moor of sixteen miles, which promises
very little for the interior parts of the kingdom; but the prospect
mended as we advanced. Passing through Dunbar, which is a neat little
town, situated on the sea-side, we lay at a country inn, where our
entertainment far exceeded our expectation; but for this we cannot give
the Scots credit, as the landlord is a native of England. Yesterday we
dined at Haddington, which has been a place of some consideration, but
is now gone to decay; and in the evening arrived at this metropolis, of
which I can say very little. It is very romantic, from its situation
on the declivity of a hill, having a fortified castle at the top, and a
royal palace at the bottom. The first thing that strikes the nose of
a stranger, shall be nameless; but what first strikes the eye, is the
unconscionable height of the houses, which generally rise to five, six,
seven, and eight stories, and, in some places (as I am assured),
to twelve. This manner of building, attended with numberless
inconveniences, must have been originally owing to want of room. Certain
it is, the town seems to be full of people: but their looks, their
language, and their customs, are so different from ours, that I can
hardly believe myself in Great-Britain.

The inn at which we put up (if it may be so called) was so filthy and
disagreeable in all respects, that my uncle began to fret, and his
gouty symptoms to recur--Recollecting, however, that he had a letter
of recommendation to one Mr Mitchelson, a lawyer, he sent it by his
servant, with a compliment, importing that we would wait upon him next
day in person; but that gentleman visited us immediately, and insisted
upon our going to his own house, until he could provide lodgings for our
accommodation. We gladly accepted, of his invitation, and repaired to
his house, where we were treated with equal elegance and hospitality, to
the utter confusion of our aunt, whose prejudices, though beginning to
give way, were not yet entirely removed. To-day, by the assistance
of our friend, we are settled in convenient lodgings, up four pair
of stairs, in the High-street, the fourth story being, in this city,
reckoned more genteel than the first. The air is, in all probability,
the better; but it requires good lungs to breathe it at this distance
above the surface of the earth.--While I do remain above it, whether
higher or lower, provided I breathe at all,


I shall ever be, Dear Phillips, yours, J. MELFORD July 18.




To Dr LEWIS.

DEAR LEWIS,

That part of Scotland contiguous to Berwick, nature seems to have
intended as a barrier between two hostile nations. It is a brown desert
of considerable extent, that produces nothing but heath and fern; and
what rendered it the more dreary when we passed, there was a thick fog
that hindered us from seeing above twenty yards from the carriage--My
sister began to make wry faces, and use her smelling-bottle; Liddy
looked blank, and Mrs Jenkins dejected; but in a few hours these clouds
were dissipated; the sea appeared upon our right, and on the left the
mountains retired a little, leaving an agreeable plain betwixt them
and the beach; but, what surprised us all, this plain, to the extent of
several miles, was covered with as fine wheat as ever I saw in the most
fertile parts of South Britain--This plentiful crop is raised in the
open field, without any inclosure, or other manure than the alga marina,
or seaweed, which abounds on this coast; a circumstance which shews
that the soil and climate are favourable; but that agriculture in this
country is not yet brought to that perfection which it has attained
in England. Inclosures would not only keep the grounds warm, and the
several fields distinct, but would also protect the crop from the high
winds, which are so frequent in this part of the island.

Dunbar is well situated for trade, and has a curious bason, where ships
of small burthen may be perfectly secure; but there is little appearance
of business in the place--From thence, all the way to Edinburgh, there
is a continual succession of fine seats, belonging to noblemen and
gentlemen; and as each is surrounded by its own parks and plantation,
they produce a very pleasing effect in a country which lies otherwise
open and exposed. At Dunbar there is a noble park, with a lodge,
belonging to the Duke of Roxburgh, where Oliver Cromwell had his
head-quarters, when Lesley, at the head of a Scotch army, took
possession of the mountains in the neighbourhood, and hampered him in
such a manner, that he would have been obliged to embark and get away by
sea, had not the fanaticism of the enemy forfeited the advantage which
they had obtained by their general's conduct--Their ministers, by
exhortation, prayer, assurance, and prophecy, instigated them to go
down and slay the Philistines in Gilgal, and they quitted their ground
accordingly, notwithstanding all that Lesley could do to restrain
the madness of their enthusiasm--When Oliver saw them in motion, he
exclaimed, 'Praised be the Lord, he hath delivered them into the hands
of his servant!' and ordered his troops to sing a psalm of thanksgiving,
while they advanced in order to the plain, where the Scots were routed
with great slaughter.

In the neighbourhood of Haddington, there is a gentleman's house, in
the building of which, and the improvements about it, he is said to have
expended forty thousand pounds: but I cannot say I was much pleased
with either the architecture or the situation; though it has in front
a pastoral stream, the banks of which are laid out in a very agreeable
manner. I intended to pay my respects to Lord Elibank, whom I had
the honour to know at London many years ago. He lives in this part of
Lothian; but was gone to the North, on a visit--You have often heard
me mention this nobleman, whom I have long revered for his humanity and
universal intelligence, over and above the entertainment arising
from originality of his character--At Musselburgh, however, I had the
good-fortune to drink tea with my old friend Mr Cardonel; and at his
house I met with Dr C--, the parson of the parish, whose humour and
conversation inflamed me with a desire of being better acquainted with
his person--I am not at all surprised that these Scots make their way in
every quarter of the globe.

This place is but four miles from Edinburgh, towards which we proceeded
along the sea-shore, upon a firm bottom of smooth sand, which the tide
had left uncovered in its retreat--Edinburgh, from this avenue, is not
seen to much advantage--We had only an imperfect view of the Castle
and upper parts of the town, which varied incessantly according to the
inflexions of the road, and exhibited the appearance of detached spires
and turrets, belonging to some magnificent edifice in ruins. The palace
of Holyrood house stands on the left, as you enter the Canon-gate--This
is a street continued from hence to the gate called Nether Bow, which is
now taken away; so that there is no interruption for a long mile, from
the bottom to the top of the hill on which the castle stands in a most
imperial situation--Considering its fine pavement, its width, and the
lofty houses on each side, this would be undoubtedly one of the noblest
streets in Europe, if an ugly mass of mean buildings, called the
Lucken-Booths, had not thrust itself, by what accident I know not, into
the middle of the way, like Middle-Row in Holborn. The city stands upon
two hills, and the bottom between them; and, with all its defects, may
very well pass for the capital of a moderate kingdom.--It is full of
people, and continually resounds with the noise of coaches and other
carriages, for luxury as well as commerce. As far as I can perceive,
here is no want of provisions--The beef and mutton are as delicate
here as in Wales; the sea affords plenty of good fish; the bread is
remarkably fine; and the water is excellent, though I'm afraid not
in sufficient quantity to answer all the purposes of cleanliness and
convenience; articles in which, it must be allowed, our fellow-subjects
are a little defective--The water is brought in leaden pipes from a
mountain in the neighbourhood, to a cistern on the Castle-hill, from
whence it is distributed to public conduits in different parts of the
city. From these it is carried in barrels, on the backs of male and
female porters, up two, three, four, five, six, seven, and eight
pairs of stairs, for the use of particular families--Every story is
a complete house, occupied by a separate family; and the stair being
common to them all, is generally left in a very filthy condition; a man
must tread with great circumspection to get safe housed with unpolluted
shoes--Nothing can form a stronger contrast, than the difference
betwixt the outside and inside of the door, for the good-women of this
metropolis are remarkably nice in the ornaments and propriety of their
apartments, as if they were resolved to transfer the imputation from
the individual to the public. You are no stranger to their method of
discharging all their impurities from their windows, at a certain hour
of the night, as the custom is in Spain, Portugal, and some parts of
France and Italy--A practice to which I can by no means be reconciled;
for notwithstanding all the care that is taken by their scavengers to
remove this nuisance every morning by break of day, enough still remains
to offend the eyes, as well as other organs of those whom use has not
hardened against all delicacy of sensation.

The inhabitants seem insensible to these impressions, and are apt to
imagine the disgust that we avow is little better than affectation; but
they ought to have some compassion for strangers, who have not been used
to this kind of sufferance; and consider, whether it may not be worth
while to take some pains to vindicate themselves from the reproach that,
on this account, they bear among their neighbours. As to the surprising
height of their houses, it is absurd in many respects; but in one
particular light I cannot view it without horror; that is, the dreadful
situation of all the families above, in case the common staircase should
be rendered impassable by a fire in the lower stories--In order to
prevent the shocking consequences that must attend such an accident, it
would be a right measure to open doors of communication from one house
to another, on every story, by which the people might fly from such
a terrible visitation. In all parts of the world, we see the force of
habit prevailing over all the dictates of convenience and sagacity. All
the people of business at Edinburgh, and even the genteel company, may
be seen standing in crowds every day, from one to two in the afternoon,
in the open street, at a place where formerly stood a market-cross,
which (by the bye) was a curious piece of Gothic architecture, still to
be seen in lord Sommerville's garden in this neighbourhood--I say, the
people stand in the open street from the force of custom, rather than
move a few yards to an Exchange that stands empty on one side, or to the
Parliament-close on the other, which is a noble square adorned with a
fine equestrian statue of king Charles II.--The company thus assembled,
are entertained with a variety of tunes, played upon a set of bells,
fixed in a steeple hard by--As these bells are well-toned, and the
musician, who has a salary from the city, for playing upon them with
keys, is no bad performer, the entertainment is really agreeable, and
very striking to the ears of a stranger.

The public inns of Edinburgh are still worse than those of London; but
by means of a worthy gentleman, to whom I was recommended, we have
got decent lodgings in the house of a widow gentlewoman of the name of
Lockhart; and here I shall stay until I have seen every thing that
is remarkable in and about this capital. I now begin to feel the good
effects of exercise--I eat like a farmer, sleep from mid-night till
eight in the morning without interruption, and enjoy a constant tide of
spirits, equally distant from inanition and excess; but whatever ebbs
or flows my constitution may undergo, my heart will still declare that I
am,

Dear Lewis, Your affectionate friend and servant, MATT. BRAMBLE EDR.
July 18.




To Mrs MARY JONES, at Brambleton-hall.

DEAR MARY,

The 'squire has been so kind as to rap my bit of nonsense under the
kiver of his own sheet--O, Mary Jones! Mary Jones! I have had trials and
trembulation. God help me! I have been a vixen and a griffin these many
days--Sattin has had power to temp me in the shape of van Ditton,
the young 'squire's wally de shamble; but by God's grease he did
not purvail--I thoft as how, there was no arm in going to a play at
Newcastle, with my hair dressed in the Parish fashion; and as for the
trifle of paint, he said as how my complexion wanted touch, and so I
let him put it on with a little Spanish owl; but a mischievous mob of
colliers, and such promiscous ribble rabble, that could bare no smut
but their own, attacked us in the street, and called me hoar and painted
Issabel, and splashed my close, and spoiled me a complete set of blond
lace triple ruffles, not a pin the worse for the ware--They cost me
seven good sillings, to lady Griskin's woman at London.

When I axed Mr Clinker what they meant by calling me Issabel, he put the
byebill into my hand, and I read of van Issabel a painted harlot, that
vas thrown out of a vindore, and the dogs came and licked her blood.
But I am no harlot; and, with God's blessing, no dog shall have my poor
blood to lick: marry, Heaven forbid, amen! As for Ditton, after all his
courting, and his compliment, he stole away an Irishman's bride, and
took a French leave of me and his master; but I vally not his going a
farting; but I have had hanger on his account--Mistriss scoulded like
mad; thof I have the comfit that all the family took my part, and even
Mr Clinker pleaded for me on his bended knee; thof, God he knows, he
had raisins enuff to complain; but he's a good sole, abounding with
Christian meekness, and one day will meet with his reward.

And now, dear Mary, we have got to Haddingborrough, among the Scots, who
are civil enuff for our money, thof I don't speak their lingo--But they
should not go for to impose upon foreigners; for the bills in their
houses say, they have different easements to let; and behold there is
nurro geaks in the whole kingdom, nor any thing for poor sarvants, but
a barrel with a pair of tongs thrown a-cross; and all the chairs in the
family are emptied into this here barrel once a-day; and at ten o'clock
at night the whole cargo is flung out of a back windore that looks into
some street or lane, and the maids calls gardy loo to the passengers
which signifies Lord have mercy upon you! and this is done every night
in every house in Haddingborrough; so you may guess, Mary Jones, what a
sweet savour comes from such a number of profuming pans; but they say it
is wholesome, and, truly, I believe it is; for being in the vapours, and
thinking of Issabel and Mr Clinker, I was going into a fit of astericks,
when this fiff, saving your presence, took me by the nose so powerfully
that I sneezed three times, and found myself wonderfully refreshed; and
this to be sure is the raisin why there are no fits in Haddingborrough.

I was likewise made believe, that there was nothing to be had but
oatmeal and seeps-heads; but if I hadn't been a fool, I mought have
known there could be no heads without kerkasses--This very blessed day
I dined upon a delicate leg of Velsh mutton and cully-flower; and as
for the oat-meal, I leave that to the sarvants of the country, which are
pore drudges, many of them without shoes or stockings--Mr Clinker tells
me here is a great call of the gospel; but I wish, I wish some of
our family be not fallen off from the rite way--O, if I was given to
tailbaring, I have my own secrets to discover--There has been a deal
of huggling and flurtation betwixt mistress and an ould Scotch officer,
called Kismycago. He looks for all the orld like the scare-crow that our
gardener has set up to frite away the sparrows; and what will come of
it, the Lord knows; but come what will, it shall never be said that I
menchioned a syllabub of the matter--Remember me kindly to Saul and the
kitten--I hope they got the horn-buck, and will put it to a good yuse,
which is the constant prayer of,

Dear Molly, Your loving friend, WIN. JENKINS ADDINGBOROUGH, July 18.




To Sir WATKIN PHILLIPS, Bart. of Jesus college, Oxon.

DEAR PHILLIPS,

If I stay much longer at Edinburgh, I shall be changed into a downright
Caledonian--My uncle observes, that I have already acquired something of
the country accent. The people here are so social and attentive in their
civilities to strangers, that I am insensibly sucked into the channel of
their manners and customs, although they are in fact much more different
from ours than you can imagine--That difference, however, which struck
me very much at my first arrival, I now hardly perceive, and my ear is
perfectly reconciled to the Scotch accent, which I find even agreeable
in the mouth of a pretty woman--It is a sort of Doric dialect, which
gives an idea of amiable simplicity--You cannot imagine how we have
been caressed and feasted in the good town of Edinburgh of which we are
become free denizens and guild brothers, by the special favour of the
magistracy.

I had a whimsical commission from Bath, to a citizen of this metropolis.
Quin, understanding our intention to visit Edinburgh, pulled out a
guinea, and desired the favour I would drink it at a tavern, with a
particular friend and bottle-companion of his, Mr R-- C--, a lawyer of
this city--I charged myself with the commission, and, taking the guinea,
'You see (said I) I have pocketed your bounty.' 'Yes (replied Quin,
laughing); and a headake into the bargain, if you drink fair.' I made
use of this introduction to Mr C--, who received me with open arms,
and gave me the rendezvous, according to the cartel. He had provided a
company of jolly fellows, among whom I found myself extremely happy;
and did Mr C-- and Quin all the justice in my power; but, alas, I was no
more than a tiro among a troop of veterans, who had compassion upon my
youth and conveyed me home in the morning by what means I know not--Quin
was mistaken, however, as to the head-ake; the claret was too good to
treat me so roughly.

While Mr Bramble holds conferences with the graver literati of the
place, and our females are entertained at visits by the Scotch ladies,
who are the best and kindest creatures upon earth, I pass my time among
the bucks of Edinburgh; who, with a great share of spirit and vivacity,
have a certain shrewdness and self-command that is not often found
among their neighbours, in the high-day of youth and exultation--Not
a hint escapes a Scotchman that can be interpreted into offence by any
individual in the company; and national reflections are never heard--In
this particular, I must own, we are both unjust and ungrateful to the
Scots; for, as far as I am able to judge, they have a real esteem for
the natives of South-Britain; and never mention our country, but with
expressions of regard--Nevertheless, they are far from being servile
imitators of our modes and fashionable vices. All their customs and
regulations of public and private oeconomy, of business and diversion,
are in their own stile. This remarkably predominates in their looks,
their dress and manner, their music, and even their cookery. Our 'squire
declares, that he knows not another people upon earth, so strongly
marked with a national character--Now we are upon the article of
cookery, I must own, some of their dishes are savoury, and even
delicate; but I am not yet Scotchman enough to relish their singed
sheep's-head and haggice, which were provided at our request, one day at
Mr Mitchelson's, where we dined--The first put me in mind of the history
of Congo, in which I had read of negroes' heads sold publickly in
the markets; the last, being a mess of minced lights, livers, suet,
oat-meal, onions, and pepper, inclosed in a sheep's stomach, had a very
sudden effect upon mine, and the delicate Mrs Tabby changed colour; when
the cause of our disgust was instantaneously removed at the nod of our
entertainer. The Scots, in general, are attached to this composition,
with a sort of national fondness, as well as to their oat-meal bread;
which is presented at every table, in thin triangular cakes, baked upon
a plate of iron, called a girdle; and these, many of the natives, even
in the higher ranks of life, prefer to wheaten-bread, which they have
here in perfection--You know we used to vex poor Murray of Baliol
college, by asking, if there was really no fruit but turnips in
Scotland?--Sure enough, I have seen turnips make their appearance, not
as a desert, but by way of hors d'oeuvres, or whets, as radishes are
served betwixt more substantial dishes in France and Italy; but it must
be observed, that the turnips of this country are as much superior in
sweetness, delicacy, and flavour, to those in England, as a musk-melon
is to the stock of a common cabbage. They are small and conical, of
a yellowish colour, with a very thin skin and, over and above their
agreeable taste, are valuable for their antiscorbutic quality--As to the
fruit now in season, such as cherries, gooseberries, and currants, there
is no want of them at Edinburgh; and in the gardens of some gentlemen,
who live in the neighbourhood, there is now a very favourable appearance
of apricots, peaches, nectarines, and even grapes: nay, I have seen
a very fine shew of pineapples within a few miles of this metropolis.
Indeed, we have no reason to be surprised at these particulars, when we
consider how little difference there is, in fact, betwixt this climate
and that of London.

All the remarkable places in the city and its avenues, for ten miles
around, we have visited, much to our satisfaction. In the Castle are
some royal apartments, where the sovereign occasionally resided; and
here are carefully preserved the regalia of the kingdom, consisting of
a crown, said to be of great value, a sceptre, and a sword of state,
adorned with jewels--Of these symbols of sovereignty, the people are
exceedingly jealous--A report being spread during the sitting of the
union-parliament, that they were removed to London, such a tumult arose,
that the lord commissioner would have been torn to pieces, if he had not
produced them for the satisfaction of the populace.

The palace of Holyrood-house is an elegant piece of architecture, but
sunk in an obscure, and, as I take it, unwholesome bottom, where
one would imagine it had been placed on purpose to be concealed. The
apartments are lofty, but unfurnished; and as for the pictures of
the Scottish kings, from Fergus I. to king William, they are paultry
daubings, mostly by the same hand, painted either from the imagination,
or porters hired to sit for the purpose. All the diversions of London
we enjoy at Edinburgh, in a small compass. Here is a well
conducted concert, in which several gentlemen perform on different
instruments--The Scots are all musicians--Every man you meet plays on
the flute, the violin, or violoncello; and there is one nobleman, whose
compositions are universally admired--Our company of actors is very
tolerable; and a subscription is now on foot for building a new theatre;
but their assemblies please me above all other public exhibitions.

We have been at the hunters' ball, where I was really astonished to see
such a number of fine women--The English, who have never crossed the
Tweed, imagine erroneously, that the Scotch ladies are not remarkable
for personal attractions; but, I can declare with a safe conscience, I
never saw so many handsome females together, as were assembled on this
occasion. At the Leith races, the best company comes hither from the
remoter provinces; so that, I suppose, we had all the beauty of the
kingdom concentrated as it were into one focus; which was, indeed, so
vehement, that my heart could hardly resist its power. Between friends,
it has sustained some damage from the bright eyes of the charming miss
R[ento]n, whom I had the honour to dance with at the ball--The countess
of Melville attracted all eyes, and the admiration of all present--She
was accompanied by the agreeable miss Grieve, who made many conquests;
nor did my sister Liddy pass unnoticed in the assembly--She is become
a toast at Edinburgh, by the name of the Fair Cambrian, and has already
been the occasion of much wine-shed; but the poor girl met with an
accident at the ball, which has given us great disturbance.

A young gentleman, the express image of that rascal Wilson, went up
to ask her to dance a minuet; and his sudden appearance shocked her so
much, that she fainted away--I call Wilson a rascal, because, if he had
been really a gentleman, with honourable intentions, he would have,
ere now, appeared in his own character--I must own, my blood boils
with indignation when I think of that fellow's presumption; and Heaven
confound me if I don't--But I won't be so womanish as to rail--Time
will, perhaps, furnish occasion--Thank God, the cause of Liddy's
disorder remains a secret. The lady directress of the ball, thinking she
was overcome by the heat of the place, had her conveyed to another room,
where she soon recovered so well, as to return and join in the country
dances, in which the Scotch lasses acquit themselves with such spirit
and agility, as put their partners to the height of their mettle. I
believe our aunt, Mrs Tabitha, had entertained hopes of being able to
do some execution among the cavaliers at this assembly. She had been
several days in consultation with milliners and mantua-makers, preparing
for the occasion, at which she made her appearance in a full suit of
damask, so thick and heavy, that the sight of it alone, at this season
of the year, was sufficient to draw drops of sweat from any man
of ordinary imagination--She danced one minuet with our friend Mr
Mitchelson, who favoured her so far, in the spirit of hospitality and
politeness; and she was called out a second time by the young laird of
Ballymawhawple, who, coming in by accident, could not readily find any
other partner; but as the first was a married man, and the second payed
no particular homage to her charms, which were also over-looked by the
rest of the company, she became dissatisfied and censorious--At supper,
she observed that the Scotch gentlemen made a very good figure, when
they were a little improved by travelling; and therefore it was pity
they did not all take the benefit of going abroad. She said the women
were awkward, masculine creatures; that, in dancing, they lifted their
legs like so many colts; that they had no idea of graceful motion, and
put on their clothes in a frightful manner; but if the truth must
be told, Tabby herself was the most ridiculous figure, and the worst
dressed of the whole assembly. The neglect of the male sex rendered
her malcontent and peevish; she now found fault with every thing at
Edinburgh, and teized her brother to leave the place, when she was
suddenly reconciled to it on a religious consideration--There is a sect
of fanaticks, who have separated themselves from the established kirk,
under the name of Seceders--They acknowledge no earthly head of the
church, reject lay-patronage, and maintain the methodist doctrines of
the new birth, the new light, the efficacy of grace, the insufficiency
of works, and the operations of the spirit. Mrs Tabitha, attended by
Humphry Clinker, was introduced to one of their conventicles, where they
both received much edification; and she has had the good fortune to
come acquainted with a pious Christian, called Mr Moffat, who is very
powerful in prayer, and often assists her in private exercises of
devotion.

I never saw such a concourse of genteel company at any races in England,
as appeared on the course of Leith--Hard by, in the fields called the
Links, the citizens of Edinburgh divert themselves at a game called
golf, in which they use a curious kind of bats, tipt with horn, and
small elastic balls of leather, stuffed with feathers, rather less than
tennis balls, but of a much harder consistence--This they strike with
such force and dexterity from one hole to another, that they will fly
to an incredible distance. Of this diversion the Scots are so fond, that
when the weather will permit, you may see a multitude of all ranks,
from the senator of justice to the lowest tradesman, mingled together in
their shirts, and following the balls with the utmost eagerness. Among
others, I was shewn one particular set of golfers, the youngest of
whom was turned of fourscore--They were all gentlemen of independent
fortunes, who had amused themselves with this pastime for the best part
of a century, without having ever felt the least alarm from sickness or
disgust; and they never went to bed, without having each the best
part of a gallon of claret in his belly. Such uninterrupted exercise,
co-operating with the keen air from the sea, must, without all doubt,
keep the appetite always on edge, and steel the constitution against all
the common attacks of distemper.

The Leith races gave occasion to another entertainment of a very
singular nature--There is at Edinburgh a society or corporation of
errand-boys, called cawdies, who ply in the streets at night with paper
lanthorns, and are very serviceable in carrying messages--These fellows,
though shabby in their appearance, and rudely familiar in their address,
are wonderfully acute, and so noted for fidelity, that there is no
instance of [a] cawdy's having betrayed his trust--Such is their
intelligence, that they know, not only every individual of the place,
but also every stranger, by that time he has been four and twenty hours
in Edinburgh; and no transaction, even the most private, can escape
their notice. They are particularly famous for their dexterity in
executing one of the functions of Mercury; though, for my own part, I
never employed them in this department of business--Had I occasion
for any service of this nature, my own man, Archy M'Alpine, is as well
qualified as e'er a cawdie in Edinburgh; and I am much mistaken, if he
has not been heretofore of their fraternity. Be that as it may, they
resolved to give a dinner and a ball at Leith, to which they formally
invited all the young noblemen and gentlemen that were at the races; and
this invitation was reinforced by an assurance that all the celebrated
ladies of pleasure would grace the entertainment with their company.--I
received a card on this occasion, and went thither with half a dozen of
my acquaintance.--In a large hall the cloth was laid on a long range of
tables joined together, and here the company seated themselves, to
the number of about fourscore, lords, and lairds, and other gentlemen,
courtezans and cawdies mingled together, as the slaves and their masters
were in the time of the Saturnalia in ancient Rome.--The toast master,
who sat at the upper end, was one Cawdie Fraser, a veteran pimp,
distinguished for his humour and sagacity, well known and much respected
in his profession by all the guests, male and female, that were here
assembled.--He had bespoke the dinner and the wine: he had taken care
that all his brethren should appear in decent apparel and clean
linen; and he himself wore a periwig with three tails in honour of the
festival.--I assure you the banquet was both elegant and plentiful,
and seasoned with a thousand sallies, that promoted a general spirit
of mirth and good humour.--After the desert, Mr Fraser proposed the
following toasts, which I don't pretend to explain. 'The best in
Christendom.'--'Gibbs' contract.'--'The beggar's benison,'--'King and
kirk.'--'Great Britain and Ireland.' Then, filling a bumper, and turning
to me, 'Mester Malford (said he), may a' unkindness cease betwixt John
Bull and his sister Moggy.'--The next person he singled out, was a
nobleman who had been long abroad.--'Ma lord (cried Fraser), here is a
bumper to a' those noblemen who have virtue enough to spend their rents
in their ain countray.'--He afterwards addressed himself to a member of
parliament in these words:--'Meester--I'm sure ye'll ha' nae objection
to my drinking, disgrace and dule to ilka Scot, that sells his
conscience and his vote.'--He discharged a third sarcasm at a person
very gaily dressed, who had risen from small beginnings, and made a
considerable fortune at play.--Filling his glass, and calling him by
name, 'Lang life (said he), to the wylie loon that gangs a-field with a
toom poke at his lunzie, and comes hame with a sackful of siller.'--All
these toasts being received with loud bursts of applause, Mr Fraser
called for pint glasses, and filled his own to the brim: then standing
up, and all his brethren following his example, 'Ma lords and gentlemen
(cried he), here is a cup of thanks for the great and undeserved honour
you have done your poor errand-boys this day.'--So saying, he and they
drank off their glasses in a trice, and quitting their seats, took their
station each behind one of the other guests; exclaiming, 'Noo we're your
honours cawdies again.'

The nobleman who had bore the first brunt of Mr Fraser's satire,
objected to his abdication. He said, as the company was assembled by
invitation from the cawdies, he expected they were to be entertained at
their expense. 'By no means, my lord (cried Fraser), I wad na he guilty
of sic presumption for the wide warld--I never affronted a gentleman
since I was born; and sure at this age I wonnot offer an indignity to
sic an honourable convention.' 'Well (said his Lordship) as you have
expended some wit, you have a right to save your money. You have given
me good counsel, and I take it in good part. As you have voluntarily
quitted your seat, I will take your place with the leave of the good
company, and think myself happy to be hailed, Father of the Feast.' He
was forthwith elected into the chair, and complimented in a bumper in
his new character.

The claret continued to circulate without interruption, till the glasses
seemed to dance upon the table, and this, perhaps, was a hint to the
ladies to call for music--At eight in the evening the ball began in
another apartment: at midnight we went to supper; but it was broad day
before I found the way to my lodgings; and, no doubt, his Lordship had a
swinging bill to discharge.

In short, I have lived so riotously for some weeks, that my uncle
begins to be alarmed on the score of my constitution, and very seriously
observes, 'that all his own infirmities are owing to such excesses
indulged in his youth--Mrs Tabitha says it would be more to the
advantage of my soul as well as body, if, instead of frequenting these
scenes of debauchery, I would accompany Mr Moffat and her to hear a
sermon of the reverend Mr M'Corkindale.--Clinker often exhorts me, with
a groan, to take care of my precious health; and even Archy M'Alpine,
when he happens to be overtaken (which is oftener the case than I could
wish), reads me a long lecture upon temperance and sobriety; and is
so very wise and sententious, that, if I could provide him with
a professor's chair, I would willingly give up the benefit of his
amonitions and service together; for I was tutor-sick at alma mater.

I am not, however, so much engrossed by the gaieties of Edinburgh, but
that I find time to make parties in the family way. We have not only
seen all the villas and villages within ten miles of the capital, but
we have also crossed the Firth, which is an arm of the sea seven miles
broad, that divides Lothian from the shire, or, as the Scots call it,
the kingdom of Fife. There is a number of large open sea-boats that ply
on this passage from Leith to Kinghorn, which is a borough on the
other side. In one of these our whole family embarked three days ago,
excepting my sister, who, being exceedingly fearful of the water, was
left to the care of Mrs Mitchelson. We had an easy and quick passage
into Fife, where we visited a number of poor towns on the sea-side,
including St Andrew's, which is the skeleton of a venerable city; but we
were much better pleased with some noble and elegant seats and castles,
of which there is a great number in that part of Scotland. Yesterday
we took boat again on our return to Leith, with fair wind and agreeable
weather; but we had not advanced half-way when the sky was suddenly
overcast, and the wind changing, blew directly in our teeth so that we
were obliged to turn, or tack the rest of the way. In a word, the gale
increased to a storm of wind and rain, attended with such a fog, that
we could not see the town of Leith, to which we were bound, nor even the
castle of Edinburgh, notwithstanding its high situation. It is not to be
doubted but that we were all alarmed on this occasion. And at the same
time, most of the passengers were seized with a nausea that produced
violent retchings. My aunt desired her brother to order the boatmen, to
put back to Kinghorn, and this expedient he actually proposed; but they
assured him there was no danger. Mrs Tabitha finding them obstinate,
began to scold, and insisted upon my uncle's exerting his authority as
a justice of the peace. Sick and peevish as he was, he could not help
laughing at this wise proposal, telling her, that his commission did not
extend so far, and, if it did, he should let the people take their own
way; for he thought it would be great presumption in him to direct them
in the exercise of their own profession. Mrs Winifred Jenkins made a
general clearance with the assistance of Mr Humphry Clinker, who joined
her both in prayer and ejaculation.--As he took it for granted that we
should not be long in this world, he offered some spiritual consolation
to Mrs Tabitha, who rejected it with great disgust, bidding him keep his
sermons for those who had leisure to hear such nonsense.--My uncle sat,
collected in himself, without speaking; my man Archy had recourse to a
brandy-bottle, with which he made so free, that I imagined he had sworn
to die of drinking any thing rather than sea-water: but the brandy had
no more effect upon him in the way of intoxication, than if it had been
sea-water in good earnest.--As for myself, I was too much engrossed by
the sickness at my stomach, to think of any thing else. Meanwhile the
sea swelled mountains high, the boat pitched with such violence, as if
it had been going to pieces; the cordage rattled, the wind roared; the
lightning flashed, the thunder bellowed, and the rain descended in
a deluge--Every time the vessel was put about, we ship'd a sea that
drenched us all to the skin.--When, by dint of turning, we thought to
have cleared the pier head, we were driven to leeward, and then the
boatmen themselves began to fear that the tide would fail before we
should fetch up our lee-way: the next trip, however, brought us into
smooth water, and we were safely landed on the quay, about one o'clock
in the afternoon.--'To be sure (cried Tabby, when she found herself
on terra firma), we must all have perished, if we had not been the
particular care of Providence.' 'Yes (replied my uncle), but I am much
of the honest highlander's mind--after he had made such a passage
as this: his friend told him he was much indebted to
Providence;--"Certainly (said Donald), but, by my saul, mon, I'se ne'er
trouble Providence again, so long as the brig of Stirling stands."'--You
must know the brig, or bridge of Stirling, stands above twenty miles
up the river Forth, of which this is the outlet--I don't find that our
'squire has suffered in his health from this adventure; but poor Liddy
is in a peaking way--I'm afraid this unfortunate girl is uneasy in her
mind; and this apprehension distracts me, for she is really an amiable
creature.

We shall set out to-morrow or next day for Stirling and Glasgow; and we
propose to penetrate a little way into the Highlands, before we turn our
course to the southward--In the mean time, commend me to all our friends
round Carfax, and believe me to be, ever yours,

EDINBURGH, Aug. 8. J. MELFORD




To Dr LEWIS.

I should be very ungrateful, dear Lewis, if I did not find myself
disposed to think and speak favourably of this people, among whom I have
met with more kindness, hospitality, and rational entertainment, in a
few weeks, than ever I received in any other country during the whole
course of my life.--Perhaps, the gratitude excited by these benefits may
interfere with the impartiality of my remarks; for a man is as apt to
be prepossessed by particular favours as to be prejudiced by private
motives of disgust. If I am partial, there is, at least, some merit
in my conversion from illiberal prejudices which had grown up with my
constitution.

The first impressions which an Englishman receives in this country, will
not contribute to the removal of his prejudices; because he refers every
thing he sees to a comparison with the same articles in his own country;
and this comparison is unfavourable to Scotland in all its exteriors,
such as the face of the country in respect to cultivation, the
appearance of the bulk of the people, and the language of conversation
in general.--I am not so far convinced by Mr Lismahago's arguments, but
that I think the Scots would do well, for their own sakes, to adopt
the English idioms and pronunciation; those of them especially, who are
resolved to push their fortunes in South-Britain--I know, by experience,
how easily an Englishman is influenced by the ear, and how apt he is
to laugh, when he hears his own language spoken with a foreign or
provincial accent--I have known a member of the house of commons speak
with great energy and precision, without being able to engage attention,
because his observations were made in the Scotch dialect, which (no
offence to lieutenant Lismahago) certainly gives a clownish air even
to sentiments of the greatest dignity and decorum.--I have declared my
opinion on this head to some of the most sensible men of this country,
observing, at the same time, that if they would employ a few natives of
England to teach the pronunciation of our vernacular tongue, in twenty
years there would be no difference, in point of dialect, between the
youth of Edinburgh and of London.

The civil regulations of this kingdom and metropolis are taken from
very different models from those of England, except in a few particular
establishments, the necessary consequences of the union.--Their college
of justice is a bench of great dignity, filled with judges of character
and ability.--I have heard some causes tried before this venerable
tribunal; and was very much pleased with the pleadings of their
advocates, who are by no means deficient either in argument or
elocution. The Scottish legislation is founded, in a great measure, on
the civil law; consequently, their proceedings vary from those of the
English tribunals; but, I think, they have the advantage of us in their
method of examining witnesses apart, and in the constitution of their
jury, by which they certainly avoid the evil which I mentioned in my
last from Lismahago's observation.

The university of Edinburgh is supplied with excellent professors in all
the sciences; and the medical school, in particular, is famous all over
Europe.--The students of this art have the best opportunity of learning
it to perfection, in all its branches, as there are different courses
for the theory of medicine and the practice of medicine; for anatomy,
chemistry, botany, and the materia medica, over and above those of
mathematics and experimental philosophy; and all these are given by men
of distinguished talents. What renders this part of education still more
complete, is the advantage of attending the infirmary, which is the best
instituted charitable foundation that I ever knew. Now we are talking
of charities, here are several hospitals, exceedingly well endowed, and
maintained under admirable regulations; and these are not only useful,
but ornamental to the city. Among these, I shall only mention the
general work-house, in which all the poor, not otherwise provided for,
are employed, according to their different abilities, with such judgment
and effect, that they nearly maintain themselves by their labour,
and there is not a beggar to be seen within the precincts of this
metropolis. It was Glasgow that set the example of this establishment,
about thirty years ago.--Even the kirk of Scotland, so long reproached
with fanaticism and canting, abounds at present with ministers
celebrated for their learning, and respectable for their moderation.--I
have heard their sermons with equal astonishment and pleasure.--The good
people of Edinburgh no longer think dirt and cobwebs essential to the
house of God.--Some of their churches have admitted such ornaments
as would have excited sedition, even in England, a little more than a
century ago; and Psalmody is here practised and taught by a professor
from the cathedral of Durham:--I should not be surprised, in a few
years, to hear it accompanied with an organ.

Edinburgh is a hot-bed of genius.--I have had the good fortune to be
made acquainted with many authors of the first distinction; such as the
two Humes, Robertson, Smith, Wallace, Blair, Ferguson, Wilkie, &c. and I
have found them all as agreeable in conversation as they are instructive
and entertaining in their writings. These acquaintances I owe to the
friendship of Dr Carlyle, who wants nothing but inclination to figure
with the rest upon paper. The magistracy of Edinburgh is changed every
year by election, and seems to be very well adapted both for state and
authority.--The lord provost is equal in dignity to the lord mayor
of London; and the four bailies are equivalent to the rank of
aldermen.--There is a dean of guild, who takes cognizance of mercantile
affairs; a treasurer; a town-clerk; and the council is composed
of deacons, one of whom is returned every year, in rotation, as
representative of every company of artificers or handicraftsmen. Though
this city, from the nature of its situation, can never be made either
very convenient or very cleanly, it has, nevertheless, an air of
magnificence that commands respect.--The castle is an instance of the
sublime in scite and architecture.--Its fortifications are kept in good
order, and there is always in it a garrison of regular soldiers, which
is relieved every year; but it is incapable of sustaining a siege
carried on according to the modern operations of war.--The castle hill,
which extends from the outward gate to the upper end of the high street,
is used as a public walk for the citizens, and commands a prospect,
equally extensive and delightful, over the county of Fife, on the other
side of the Frith, and all along the sea-coast, which is covered with a
succession of towns that would seem to indicate a considerable share of
commerce; but, if the truth must be told, these towns have been falling
to decay ever since the union, by which the Scots were in a
great measure deprived of their trade with France.--The palace of
Holyrood-house is a jewel in architecture, thrust into a hollow where
it cannot be seen; a situation which was certainly not chosen by the
ingenious architect, who must have been confined to the site of the old
palace, which was a convent. Edinburgh is considerably extended on the
south side, where there are divers little elegant squares built in the
English manner; and the citizens have planned some improvements on the
north, which, when put in execution, will add greatly to the beauty and
convenience of this capital.

The sea-port is Leith, a flourishing town, about a mile from the city,
in the harbour of which I have seen above one hundred ships lying all
together. You must know, I had the curiosity to cross the Frith in a
passage boat, and stayed two days in Fife, which is remarkably fruitful
in corn, and exhibits a surprising number of fine seats, elegantly
built, and magnificently furnished. There is an incredible number of
noble houses in every part of Scotland that I have seen.--Dalkeith,
Pinkie, Yester, and lord Hopton's [Hopetoun's], all of them within four
or five miles of Edinburgh, are princely palaces, in every one of which
a sovereign might reside at his case.--I suppose the Scots affect these
monuments of grandeur.--If I may be allowed to mingle censure with my
remarks upon a people I revere, I must observe, that their weak side
seems to be vanity.--I am afraid that even their hospitality is not
quite free of ostentation. I think I have discovered among them uncommon
pains taken to display their fine linen, of which, indeed, they have
great plenty, their furniture, plate, housekeeping, and variety of
wines, in which article, it must be owned, they are profuse, if not
prodigal--A burgher of Edinburgh, not content to vie with a citizen of
London, who has ten times his fortune, must excel him in the expence as
well as elegance of his entertainments.

Though the villas of the Scotch nobility and gentry have generally
an air of grandeur and state, I think their gardens and parks are not
comparable to those of England; a circumstance the more remarkable, as I
was told by the ingenious Mr Phillip Miller of Chelsea, that almost all
the gardeners of South-Britain were natives of Scotland. The verdure of
this country is not equal to that of England.--The pleasure-grounds are,
in my opinion, not so well laid out according to the genius loci; nor
are the lawns, and walks, and hedges kept in such delicate order.--The
trees are planted in prudish rows, which have not such an agreeable
natural effect, as when they are thrown into irregular groupes, with
intervening glades; and firs, which they generally raise around their
houses, look dull and funereal in the summer season.--I must confess,
indeed, that they yield serviceable timber, and good shelter against the
northern blasts; that they grow and thrive in the most barren soil, and
continually perspire a fine balsam of turpentine, which must render the
air very salutary and sanative to lungs of a tender texture.

Tabby and I have been both frightened in our return by sea from the
coast of Fife--She was afraid of drowning, and I of catching cold, in
consequence of being drenched with sea-water; but my fears as well as
hers, have been happily disappointed. She is now in perfect health; I
wish I could say the same of Liddy--Something uncommon is the matter
with that poor girl; her colour fades, her appetite fails, and her
spirits flag--She is become moping and melancholy, and is often found
in tears--Her brother suspects internal uneasiness on account of Wilson,
and denounces vengeance against that adventurer.--She was, it seems,
strongly affected at the ball by the sudden appearance of one Mr Gordon,
who strongly resembles the said Wilson; but I am rather suspicious that
she caught cold by being overheated with dancing.--I have consulted Dr
Gregory, an eminent physician of an amiable character, who advises the
highland air, and the use of goat-milk whey, which, surely, cannot have
a bad effect upon a patient who was born and bred among the mountains of
Wales--The doctors opinion is the more agreeable, as we shall find those
remedies in the very place which I proposed as the utmost extent of our
expedition--I mean the borders of Argyle.

Mr Smollett, one of the judges of the commissary court, which is now
sitting, has very kindly insisted upon our lodging at his country-house,
on the banks of Lough-Lomond, about fourteen miles beyond Glasgow. For
this last city we shall set out in two days, and take Stirling in our
way, well provided with recommendations from our friends at Edinburgh,
whom, I protest, I shall leave with much regret. I am so far from
thinking it any hardship to live in this country, that, if I was obliged
to lead a town life, Edinburgh would certainly be the headquarters of


Yours always, MATT. BRAMBLE EDIN., August 8.




To Sir WATKIN PHILLIPS, Bart. of Jesus college, Oxon.

DEAR KNIGHT,

I am now little short of the Ultima Thule, if this appellation properly
belongs to the Orkneys or Hebrides. These last are now lying before me,
to the amount of some hundreds, scattered up and down the Deucalidonian
sea, affording the most picturesque and romantic prospect I ever
beheld--I write this letter in a gentleman's house, near the town of
Inverary which may be deemed the capital of the West Highlands, famous
for nothing so much as for the stately castle begun, and actually
covered in by the late duke of Argyle, at a prodigious expence--Whether
it will ever be completely finished is a question.--

But, to take things in order--We left Edinburgh ten days ago; and the
further North we proceed, we find Mrs Tabitha the less manageable; so
that her inclinations are not of the nature of the loadstone; they point
not towards the pole. What made her leave Edinburgh with reluctance at
last, if we may believe her own assertions, was a dispute which she left
unfinished with Mr Moffat, touching the eternity of hell torments. That
gentleman, as he advanced in years, began to be sceptical on this head,
till, at length, he declared open war against the common acceptation of
the word eternal. He is now persuaded, that eternal signifies no more
than an indefinite number of years; and that the most enormous sinner
may be quit for nine millions, nine hundred thousand, nine hundred and
ninety-nine years of hell-fire; which term or period, as he very well
observes, forms but an inconsiderable drop, as it were, in the ocean of
eternity--For this mitigation he contends, as a system agreeable to the
ideas of goodness and mercy, which we annex to the supreme Being--Our
aunt seemed willing to adopt this doctrine in favour of the wicked; but
he hinted that no person whatever was so righteous as to be exempted
entirely from punishment in a future state; and that the most pious
Christian upon earth might think himself very happy to get off for
a fast of seven or eight thousand years in the midst of fire and
brimstone. Mrs Tabitha revolted at this dogma, which filled her at once
with horror and indignation--She had recourse to the opinion of Humphry
Clinker, who roundly declared it was the popish doctrine of purgatory,
and quoted scripture in defence of the fire everlasting, prepared for
the devil and his angels--The reverend master Mackcorkendal, and all the
theologists and saints of that persuasion were consulted, and some of
them had doubts about the matter; which doubts and scruples had begun to
infect our aunt, when we took our departure from Edinburgh.

We passed through Linlithgow, where there was an elegant royal palace,
which is now gone to decay, as well as the town itself--This too is
pretty much the case with Stirling, though it still boasts of a fine
old castle in which the kings of Scotland were wont to reside in their
minority--But Glasgow is the pride of Scotland, and, indeed, it might
very well pass for an elegant and flourishing city in any part of
Christendom. There we had the good fortune to be received into the house
of Mr Moore, an eminent surgeon, to whom we were recommended by one of
our friends at Edinburgh; and, truly, he could not have done us more
essential service--Mr Moore is a merry facetious companion, sensible and
shrewd, with a considerable fund of humour; and his wife an agreeable
woman, well bred, kind, and obliging. Kindness, which I take to be
the essence of good-nature and humanity, is the distinguishing
characteristic of the Scotch ladies in their own country--Our landlord
shewed us every thing, and introduced us to all the world at Glasgow;
where, through his recommendation, we were complimented with the freedom
of the town. Considering the trade and opulence of this place, it cannot
but abound with gaiety and diversions. Here is a great number of young
fellows that rival the youth of the capital in spirit and expence; and
I was soon convinced, that all the female beauties of Scotland were
not assembled at the hunters ball in Edinburgh--The town of Glasgow
flourishes in learning as well as in commerce--Here is an university,
with professors in all the different branches of science, liberally
endowed, and judiciously chosen--It was vacation time when I passed,
so that I could not entirely satisfy my curiosity; but their mode of
education is certainly preferable to ours in some respects. The students
are not left to the private instruction of tutors; but taught in public
schools or classes, each science by its particular professor or regent.

My uncle is in raptures with Glasgow--He not only visited all the
manufactures of the place, but made excursions all round to Hamilton,
Paisley, Renfrew, and every other place within a dozen miles, where
there was any thing remarkable to be seen in art or nature. I believe
the exercise, occasioned by those jaunts, was of service to my sister
Liddy, whose appetite and spirits begin to revive--Mrs Tabitha displayed
her attractions as usual, and actually believed she had entangled one
Mr Maclellan, a rich inkle-manufacturer, in her snares; but when matters
came to an explanation, it appeared that his attachment was altogether
spiritual, founded upon an intercourse of devotion, at the meeting of
Mr John Wesley; who, in the course of his evangelical mission, had come
hither in person--At length, we set out for the banks of Lough-Lomond,
passing through the little borough of Dumbarton, or (as my uncle will
have it) Dunbritton, where there is a castle, more curious than any
thing of the kind I had ever seen. It is honoured with a particular
description by the elegant Buchanan, as an arx inexpugnabilis,
and, indeed, it must have been impregnable by the antient manner of
besieging. It is a rock of considerable extent, rising with a double
top, in an angle formed by the confluence of two rivers, the Clyde and
the Leven; perpendicular and inaccessible on all sides, except in one
place where the entrance is fortified; and there is no rising ground
in the neighbourhood from whence it could be damaged by any kind of
battery.

From Dumbarton, the West Highlands appear in the form of huge, dusky
mountains, piled one over another; but this prospect is not at all
surprising to a native of Glamorgan--We have fixed our headquarters
at Cameron, a very neat country-house belonging to commissary Smollet,
where we found every sort of accommodation we could desire--It is
situated like a Druid's temple, in a grove of oak, close by the side
of Lough-Lomond, which is a surprising body of pure transparent water,
unfathomably deep in many places, six or seven miles broad, four and
twenty miles in length, displaying above twenty green islands, covered
with wood; some of them cultivated for corn, and many of them stocked
with red deer--They belong to different gentlemen, whose seats are
scattered along the banks of the lake, which are agreeably romantic
beyond all conception. My uncle and I have left the women at Cameron, as
Mrs Tabitha would by no means trust herself again upon the water, and
to come hither it was necessary to cross a small inlet of the sea, in an
open ferry-boat--This country appears more and more wild and savage the
further we advance; and the People are as different from the Low-land
Scots, in their looks, garb, and language, as the mountaineers of
Brecknock are from the inhabitants of Herefordshire.

When the Lowlanders want to drink a chearupping-cup, they go to the
public house, called the Change-house, and call for a chopine of
two-penny, which is a thin, yeasty beverage, made of malt; not quite so
strong as the table-beer of England,--This is brought in a pewter stoop,
shaped like a skittle, from whence it is emptied into a quaff; that is,
a curious cup made of different pieces of wood, such as box and ebony,
cut into little staves, joined alternately, and secured with delicate
hoops, having two cars or handles--It holds about a gill, is sometimes
tipt round the mouth with silver, and has a plate of the same metal at
bottom, with the landlord's cypher engraved.--The Highlanders, on the
contrary, despise this liquor, and regale themselves with whisky; a malt
spirit, as strong as geneva, which they swallow in great quantities,
without any signs of inebriation. They are used to it from the cradle,
and find it an excellent preservative against the winter cold, which
must be extreme on these mountains--I am told that it is given with
great success to infants, as a cordial in the confluent smallpox, when
the eruption seems to flag, and the symptoms grow unfavourable--The
Highlanders are used to eat much more animal food than falls to the
share of their neighbours in the Low-country--They delight in hunting;
have plenty of deer and other game, with a great number of sheep,
goats, and black-cattle running wild, which they scruple not to kill as
vension, without being much at pains to ascertain the property.

Inverary is but a poor town, though it stands immediately under the
protection of the duke of Argyle, who is a mighty prince in this part of
Scotland. The peasants live in wretched cabins, and seem very poor; but
the gentlemen are tolerably well lodged, and so loving to strangers,
that a man runs some risque of his life from their hospitality--It must
be observed that the poor Highlanders are now seen to disadvantage. They
have been not only disarmed by act of parliament, but also deprived of
their ancient garb, which was both graceful and convenient; and what
is a greater hardship still, they are compelled to wear breeches; a
restraint which they cannot bear with any degree of patience: indeed,
the majority wear them, not in the proper place, but on poles or long
staves over their shoulders--They are even debarred the use of their
striped stuff called Tartane, which was their own manufacture, prized
by them above all the velvets, brocades, and tissues of Europe and Asia.
They now lounge along in loose great coats, of coarse russet, equally
mean and cumbersome, and betray manifest marks of dejection--Certain it
is, the government could not have taken a more effectual method to break
their national spirit.

We have had princely sport in hunting the stag on these mountains. These
are the lonely hills of Morven, where Fingal and his heroes enjoyed the
same pastime; I feel an enthusiastic pleasure when I survey the brown
heath that Ossian wont to tread; and hear the wind whistle through
the bending grass--When I enter our landlord's hall, I look for the
suspended harp of that divine bard, and listen in hopes of hearing the
aerial sound of his respected spirit--The poems of Ossian are in every
mouth--A famous antiquarian of this country, the laird of Macfarlane, at
whose house we dined a few days ago, can repeat them all in the original
Gallick, which has a great affinity to the Welch, not only in the
general sound, but also in a great number of radical words; and I make
no doubt that they are both sprung from the same origin. I was not a
little surprised, when asking a Highlander one day, if he knew where we
should find any game? he replied, 'hu niel Sassenagh', which signifies
no English: the very same answer I should have received from a Welchman,
and almost in the same words. The Highlanders have no other name for
the people of the Low-country, but Sassenagh, or Saxons; a strong
presumption, that the Lowland Scots and the English are derived from the
same stock--The peasants of these hills strongly resemble those of Wales
in their looks, their manners, and habitations; every thing I see, and
hear, and feel, seems Welch--The mountains, vales, and streams; the
air and climate; the beef, mutton, and game, are all Welch--It must be
owned, however, that this people are better Provided than we in some
articles--They have plenty of red deer and roebuck, which are fat
and delicious at this season of the year. Their sea teems with amazing
quantities of the finest fish in the world, and they find means to
procure very good claret at a very small expence.

Our landlord is a man of consequence in this part of the country; a
cadet from the family of Argyle and hereditary captain of one of his
castles--His name, in plain English, is Dougal Campbell; but as there is
a great number of the same appellation, they are distinguished (like
the Welch) by patronimics; and as I have known an antient Briton called
Madoc ap-Morgan ap-Jenkin, ap-Jones, our Highland chief designs himself
Dou'l Mac-amish mac-'oul ichian, signifying Dougal, the son of James,
the son of Dougal, the son of John. He has travelled in the course
of his education, and is disposed to make certain alterations in his
domestic oeconomy; but he finds it impossible to abolish the ancient
customs of the family; some of which are ludicrous enough--His piper for
example, who is an hereditary officer of the household, will not part
with the least particle of his privileges. He has a right to wear the
kilt, or ancient Highland dress, with the purse, pistol, and durk--a
broad yellow ribbon, fixed to the chanter-pipe, is thrown over his
shoulder, and trails along the ground, while he performs the function of
his minstrelsy; and this, I suppose, is analogous to the pennon or flag
which was formerly carried before every knight in battle.--He plays
before the laird every Sunday in his way to the kirk, which he circles
three times, performing the family march which implies defiance to all
the enemies of the clan; and every morning he plays a full hour by the
clock, in the great hall, marching backwards and forwards all the time,
with a solemn pace, attended by the laird's kinsmen, who seem much
delighted with the music--In this exercise, he indulges them with a
variety of pibrochs or airs, suited to the different passions, which he
would either excite or assuage.

Mr Campbell himself, who performs very well on the violin, has an
invincible antipathy to the sound of the Highland bagpipe, which
sings in the nose with a most alarming twang, and, indeed, is quite
intolerable to ears of common sensibility, when aggravated by the echo
of a vaulted hall--He therefore begged the piper would have some
mercy upon him, and dispense with this part of the morning service--A
consultation of the clan being held on this occasion, it was unanimously
agreed, that the laird's request could not be granted without a
dangerous encroachment upon the customs of the family--The piper
declared, he could not give up for a moment the privilege he derived
from his ancestors; nor would the laird's relations forego an
entertainment which they valued above all others--There was no remedy;
Mr Campbell, being obliged to acquiesce, is fain to stop his ears with
cotton; to fortify his head with three or four night-caps and every
morning retire into the penetralia of his habitation, in order to avoid
this diurnal annoyance. When the music ceases, he produces himself at an
open window that looks into the courtyard, which is by this time filled
with a crowd of his vassals and dependents, who worship his first
appearance, by uncovering their heads, and bowing to the earth with
the most humble prostration. As all these people have something to
communicate in the way of proposal, complaint, or petition, they wait
patiently till the laird comes forth, and, following him in his walks,
are favoured each with a short audience in his turn. Two days ago, he
dispatched above an hundred different sollicitors, in walking with us to
the house of a neighbouring gentleman, where we dined by invitation.
Our landlord's housekeeping is equally rough and hospitable, and savours
much of the simplicity of ancient times: the great hall, paved with flat
stones, is about forty-five feet by twenty-two, and serves not only for
a dining-room, but also for a bedchamber, to gentlemen-dependents and
hangers-on of the family. At night, half a dozen occasional beds are
ranged on each side along the wall. These are made of fresh heath,
pulled up by the roots, and disposed in such a manner as to make a very
agreeable couch, where they lie, without any other covering than the
plaid--My uncle and I were indulged with separate chambers and down beds
which we begged to exchange for a layer of heath; and indeed I never
slept so much to my satisfaction. It was not only soft and elastic, but
the plant, being in flower, diffused an agreeable fragrance, which is
wonderfully refreshing and restorative.

Yesterday we were invited to the funeral of an old lady, the grandmother
of a gentleman in this neighbourhood, and found ourselves in the midst
of fifty people, who were regaled with a sumptuous feast, accompanied by
the music of a dozen pipers. In short, this meeting had all the air of
a grand festival; and the guests did such honour to the entertainment,
that many of them could not stand when we were reminded of the business
on which we had met. The company forthwith taking horse, rode in a very
irregular cavalcade to the place of interment, a church, at the distance
of two long miles from the castle. On our arrival, however, we found
we had committed a small oversight, in leaving the corpse behind; so we
were obliged to wheel about, and met the old gentlewoman half way, being
carried upon poles by the nearest relations of her family, and attended
by the coronach, composed of a multitude of old hags, who tore their
hair, beat their breasts, and howled most hideously. At the grave, the
orator, or senachie, pronounced the panegyric of the defunct, every
period being confirmed by a yell of the coronach. The body was committed
to the earth, the pipers playing a pibroch all the time; and all the
company standing uncovered. The ceremony was closed with the discharge
of pistols; then we returned to the castle, resumed the bottle, and
by midnight there was not a sober person in the family, the females
excepted. The 'squire and I were, with some difficulty, permitted to
retire with our landlord in the evening; but our entertainer was a
little chagrined at our retreat; and afterwards seemed to think it a
disparagement to his family, that not above a hundred gallons of whisky
had been drunk upon such a solemn occasion. This morning we got up by
four, to hunt the roebuck, and, in half an hour, found breakfast ready
served in the hall. The hunters consisted of Sir George Colquhoun and
me, as strangers (my uncle not chusing to be of the party), of the laird
in person, the laird's brother, the laird's brother's son, the laird's
sister's son, the laird's father's brother's son, and all their foster
brothers, who are counted parcel of the family: but we were attended by
an infinite number of Gaelly's, or ragged Highlanders without shoes or
stockings.

The following articles formed our morning's repast: one kit of boiled
eggs; a second, full of butter; a third full of cream; an entire cheese,
made of goat's milk; a large earthen pot full of honey; the best part
of a ham; a cold venison pasty; a bushel of oat meal, made in thin cakes
and bannocks, with a small wheaten loaf in the middle for the strangers;
a large stone bottle full of whisky, another of brandy, and a kilderkin
of ale. There was a ladle chained to the cream kit, with curious wooden
bickers to be filled from this reservoir. The spirits were drank out of
a silver quaff, and the ale out of hems: great justice was done to the
collation by the guest in general; one of them in particular ate above
two dozen of hard eggs, with a proportionable quantity of bread, butter,
and honey; nor was one drop of liquor left upon the board. Finally,
a large roll of tobacco was presented by way of desert, and every
individual took a comfortable quid, to prevent the bad effects of the
morning air. We had a fine chace over the mountains, after a roebuck,
which we killed, and I got home time enough to drink tea with Mrs
Campbell and our 'squire. To-morrow we shall set out on our return for
Cameron. We propose to cross the Frith of Clyde, and take the towns of
Greenock and Port-Glasgow in our way. This circuit being finished, we
shall turn our faces to the south, and follow the sun with augmented
velocity, in order to enjoy the rest of the autumn in England, where
Boreas is not quite so biting as he begins already to be on the tops
of these northern hills. But our progress from place to place shall
continue to be specified in these detached journals of

Yours always, J. MELFORD ARGYLSHIRE, Sept. 3.




To Dr LEWIS.

DEAR DICK,

About a fortnight is now elapsed, since we left the capital of Scotland,
directing our course towards Stirling, where we lay. The castle of this
place is such another as that of Edinburgh, and affords a surprising
prospect of the windings of the river Forth, which are so extraordinary,
that the distance from hence to Alloa by land, is but forty miles, and
by water it is twenty-four. Alloa is a neat thriving town, that depends
in a great measure on the commerce of Glasgow, the merchants of which
send hither tobacco and other articles, to be deposited in warehouses
for exportation from the Frith of Forth. In our way hither we visited
a flourishing iron-work, where, instead of burning wood, they use coal,
which they have the art of clearing in such a manner as frees it from
the sulphur, that would otherwise render the metal too brittle for
working. Excellent coal is found in almost every part of Scotland.

The soil of this district produces scarce any other grain but oats, lid
barley; perhaps because it is poorly cultivated, and almost altogether
uninclosed. The few inclosures they have consist of paultry walls of
loose stones gathered from the fields, which indeed they cover, as if
they had been scattered on purpose. When I expressed my surprize that
the peasants did not disencumber their grounds of these stones; a
gentleman, well acquainted with the theory as well as practice of
farming, assured me that the stones, far from being prejudicial, were
serviceable to the crop. This philosopher had ordered a field of his own
to be cleared, manured and sown with barley, and the produce was more
scanty than before. He caused the stones to be replaced, and next year
the crop was as good as ever. The stones were removed a second time,
and the harvest failed; they were again brought back, and the ground
retrieved its fertility. The same experiment has been tried in different
parts of Scotland with the same success--Astonished at this information,
I desired to know in what manner he accounted for this strange
phenomenon; and he said there were three ways in which the stones
might be serviceable. They might possibly restrain an excess in the
perspiration of the earth, analogous to colliquative sweats, by which
the human body is sometimes wasted and consumed. They might act as so
many fences to protect the tender blade from the piercing winds of the
spring; or, by multiplying the reflexion of the sun, they might increase
the warmth, so as to mitigate the natural chilness of the soil
and climate--But, surely this excessive perspiration might be more
effectually checked by different kinds of manure, such as ashes, lime,
chalk, or marl, of which last it seems there are many pits in this
kingdom: as for the warmth, it would be much more equally obtained by
inclosures; the cultivation would require less labour; and the ploughs,
harrows, and horses, would not suffer half the damage which they now
sustain.

These north-western parts are by no means fertile in corn. The ground is
naturally barren and moorish. The peasants are poorly lodged, meagre
in their looks, mean in their apparel, and remarkably dirty. This last
reproach they might easily wash off, by means of those lakes, rivers,
and rivulets of pure water, with which they are so liberally supplied by
nature. Agriculture cannot be expected to flourish where the farms are
small, the leases short, and the husbandman begins upon a rack rent,
without a sufficient stock to answer the purposes of improvement. The
granaries of Scotland are the banks of the Tweed, the counties of East
and Mid-Lothian, the Carse of Gowrie, in Perthshire, equal in fertility
to any part of England, and some tracts in Aberdeenshire and Murray,
where I am told the harvest is more early than in Northumberland,
although they lie above two degrees farther north. I have a strong
curiosity to visit many places beyond the Forth and the Tay, such as
Perth, Dundee, Montrose, and Aberdeen, which are towns equally elegant
and thriving; but the season is too far advanced to admit of this
addition to my original plan.

I am so far happy as to have seen Glasgow, which, to the best of my
recollection and judgment, is one of the prettiest towns in Europe; and,
without all doubt, it is one of the most flourishing in Great Britain.
In short, it is a perfect bee-hive in point of industry. It stands
partly on a gentle declivity; but the greatest part of it is in a plain,
watered by the river Clyde. The streets are straight, open, airy, and
well paved; and the houses lofty and well built of hewn stone. At the
upper end of the town, there is a venerable cathedral, that may be
compared with York-minster or West-minster; and, about the middle of the
descent from this to the Cross, is the college, a respectable pile
of building, with all manner of accommodation for the professors and
students, including an elegant library, and a observatory well provided
with astronomical instruments. The number of inhabitants is said to
amount to thirty thousand; and marks of opulence and independency appear
in every quarter of this commercial city, which, however, is not without
its inconveniences and defects. The water of their public pumps is
generally hard and brackish, an imperfection the loss excusable, as
the river Clyde runs by their doors, in the lower part of the town; and
there are rivulets and springs above the cathedral, sufficient to fill a
large reservoir with excellent water, which might be thence distributed
to all the different parts of the city. It is of more consequence to
consult the health of the inhabitants in this article than to employ so
much attention in beautifying their town with new streets, squares, and
churches. Another defect, not so easily remedied, is the shallowness
of the river, which will not float vessels of any burthen within ten or
twelve miles of the city; so that the merchants are obliged to load and
unload their ships at Greenock and Port-Glasgow, situated about fourteen
miles nearer the mouth of the Frith, where it is about two miles broad.

The people of Glasgow have a noble spirit of enterprise--Mr Moore, a
surgeon, to whom I was recommended from Edinburgh, introduced me to all
the principal merchants of the place. Here I became acquainted with
Mr Cochran, who may be stiled one of the sages of this kingdom. He was
first magistrate at the time of the last rebellion. I sat as member
when he was examined in the house of commons, upon which occasion Mr P--
observed he had never heard such a sensible evidence given at that bar.
I was also introduced to Dr John Gordon, a patriot of a truly Roman
spirit, who is the father of the linen manufacture in this place, and
was the great promoter of the city workhouse, infirmary, and other works
of public utility. Had he lived in ancient Rome, he would have been
honoured with a statue at the public expence. I moreover conversed with
one Mr G--ssf--d, whom I take to be one of the greatest merchants in
Europe. In the last war, he is said to have had at one time five and
twenty ships with their cargoes, his own property, and to have traded
for above half a million sterling a-year. The last war was a fortunate
period for the commerce of Glasgow--The merchants, considering that
their ships bound for America, launching out at once into the Atlantic
by the north of Ireland, pursued a track very little frequented
by privateers, resolved to insure one another, and saved a very
considerable sum by this resolution, as few or none of their ships were
taken--You must know I have a sort of national attachment to this part
of Scotland--The great church dedicated to St Mongah, the river Clyde,
and other particulars that smack of our Welch language and customs,
contribute to flatter me with the notion, that these people are the
descendants of the Britons, who once possessed this country. Without
all question, this was a Cumbrian kingdom: its capital was Dumbarton (a
corruption of Dunbritton) which still exists as a royal borough, at
the influx of the Clyde and Leven, ten miles below Glasgow. The same
neighbourhood gave birth to St Patrick, the apostle of Ireland, at a
place where there is still a church and village, which retain his name.
Hard by are some vestiges of the famous Roman wall, built in the reign
of Antonine, from the Clyde to the Forth, and fortified with castles, to
restrain the incursions of the Scots or Caledonians, who inhabited
the West-Highlands. In a line parallel to this wall, the merchants of
Glasgow have determined to make a navigable canal betwixt the two Firths
which will be of incredible advantage to their commerce, in transporting
merchandize from one side of the island to the other.

From Glasgow we travelled along the Clyde, which is a delightful stream,
adorned on both sides with villas, towns, and villages. Here is no want
of groves, and meadows, and corn-fields interspersed; but on this side
of Glasgow, there is little other grain than oats and barley; the first
are much better, the last much worse, than those of the same species in
England. I wonder, there is so little rye, which is a grain that will
thrive in almost any soil; and it is still more surprising, that the
cultivation of potatoes should be so much neglected in the Highlands,
where the poor people have not meal enough to supply them with bread
through the winter. On the other side of the river are the towns of
Paisley and Renfrew. The first, from an inconsiderable village, is
become one of the most flourishing places of the kingdom, enriched
by the linen, cambrick, flowered lawn, and silk manufactures. It was
formerly noted for a rich monastery of the monks of Clugny, who wrote
the famous Scoti-Chronicon, called The Black Book of Paisley. The old
abbey still remains, converted into a dwelling-house, belonging to the
earl of Dundonald. Renfrew is a pretty town, on the banks of Clyde,
capital of the shire, which was heretofore the patrimony of the Stuart
family, and gave the title of baron to the king's eldest son, which is
still assumed by the prince of Wales.

The Clyde we left a little on our left-hand at Dunbritton, where it
widens into an aestuary or frith, being augmented by the influx of the
Leven. On this spot stands the castle formerly called Alcluyd, washed,
by these two rivers on all sides, except a narrow isthmus, which at
every spring-tide is overflowed. The whole is a great curiosity, from
the quality and form of the rock, as well as from the nature of its
situation--We now crossed the water of Leven, which, though nothing near
so considerable as the Clyde, is much more transparent, pastoral, and
delightful. This charming stream is the outlet of Lough-Lomond, and
through a tract of four miles pursues its winding course, murmuring over
a bed of pebbles, till it joins the Frith at Dunbritton. A very little
above its source, on the lake, stands the house of Cameron, belonging to
Mr Smollett, so embosomed in an oak wood, that we did not see it till
we were within fifty yards of the door. I have seen the Lago di Garda,
Albano, De Vico, Bolsena, and Geneva, and, upon my honour, I prefer
Lough-Lomond to them all, a preference which is certainly owing to the
verdant islands that seem to float upon its surface, affording the most
inchanting objects of repose to the excursive view. Nor are the banks
destitute of beauties, which even partake of the sublime. On this side
they display a sweet variety of woodland, cornfield, and pasture, with
several agreeable villas emerging as it were out of the lake, till, at
some distance, the prospect terminates in huge mountains covered with
heath, which being in the bloom, affords a very rich covering of purple.
Every thing here is romantic beyond imagination. This country is justly
stiled the Arcadia of Scotland; and I don't doubt but it may vie with
Arcadia in every thing but climate.--I am sure it excels it in verdure,
wood, and water.--What say you to a natural bason of pure water, near
thirty miles long, and in some places seven miles broad, and in many
above a hundred fathom deep, having four and twenty habitable islands,
some of them stocked with deer, and all of them covered with wood;
containing immense quantities of delicious fish, salmon, pike, trout,
perch, flounders, eels, and powans, the last a delicate kind of
fresh-water herring peculiar to this lake; and finally communicating
with the sea, by sending off the Leven, through which all those species
(except the powan) make their exit and entrance occasionally?

Inclosed I send you the copy of a little ode to this river, by Dr
Smollett, who was born on the banks of it, within two miles of the
place where I am now writing.--It is at least picturesque and accurately
descriptive, if it has no other merit.--There is an idea of truth in an
agreeable landscape taken from nature, which pleases me more than the
gayest fiction which the most luxuriant fancy can display.

I have other remarks to make; but as my paper is full, I must reserve
them till the next occasion. I shall only observe at present, that I am
determined to penetrate at least forty miles into the Highlands, which
now appear like a vast fantastic vision in the clouds, inviting the
approach of

Yours always, MATT. BRAMBLE CAMERON, Aug. 28.

ODE TO LEVEN-WATER

On Leven's banks, while free to rove, And tune the rural pipe to love; I
envied not the happiest swain That ever trod th' Arcadian plain.

Pure stream! in whose transparent wave My youthful limbs I wont to
lave; No torrents stain thy limpid source; No rocks impede thy dimpling
course, That sweetly warbles o'er its bed, With white, round, polish'd
pebbles spread; While, lightly pois'd, the scaly brood In myriads cleave
thy crystal flood; The springing trout in speckled pride; The salmon,
monarch of the tide; The ruthless pike, intent on war; The silver eel,
and motled par.*

Devolving from thy parent lake, A charming maze thy waters make, By
bow'rs of birch, and groves of pine, And hedges flow'r'd with eglantine.

Still on thy banks so gayly green, May num'rous herds and flocks be
seen, And lasses chanting o'er the pail, And shepherds piping in the
dale, And ancient faith that knows no guile, And industry imbrown'd with
toil, And hearts resolv'd, and hands prepar'd, The blessings they enjoy
to guard.

     * The par is a small fish, not unlike the smelt, which it
     rivals in delicacy and flavour.




To Dr LEWIS.

DEAR DOCTOR,

If I was disposed to be critical, I should say this house of Cameron is
too near the lake, which approaches, on one side, to within six or seven
yards of the window. It might have been placed in a higher site, which
would have afforded a more extensive prospect and a drier atmosphere;
but this imperfection is not chargeable on the present proprietor, who
purchased it ready built, rather than be at the trouble of repairing his
own family-house of Bonhill, which stands two miles from hence on the
Leven, so surrounded with plantation, that it used to be known by the
name of the Mavis (or thrush) Nest. Above that house is a romantic glen
or clift of a mountain, covered with hanging woods having at bottom a
stream of fine water that forms a number of cascades in its descent to
join the Leven; so that the scene is quite enchanting. A captain of a
man of war, who had made the circuit of the globe with Mr Anson, being
conducted to this glen, exclaimed, 'Juan Fernandez, by God!'

Indeed, this country would be a perfect paradise, if it was not, like
Wales, cursed with a weeping climate, owing to the same cause in both,
the neighbourhood of high mountains, and a westerly situation, exposed
to the vapours of the Atlantic ocean. This air, however, notwithstanding
its humidity, is so healthy, that the natives are scarce ever visited by
any other disease than the smallpox, and certain cutaneous evils, which
are the effects of dirty living, the great and general reproach of the
commonalty of this kingdom. Here are a great many living monuments of
longaevity; and among the rest a person, whom I treat with singular
respect, as a venerable druid, who has lived near ninety years,
without pain or sickness, among oaks of his own planting.--He was once
proprietor of these lands; but being of a projecting spirit, some of
his schemes miscarried, and he was obliged to part with his possession,
which hath shifted hands two or three times since that period; but every
succeeding proprietor hath done every thing in his power, to make
his old age easy and comfortable. He has a sufficiency to procure
the necessaries of life; and he and his old woman reside in a small
convenient farm-house, having a little garden which he cultivates with
his own hands. This ancient couple live in great health, peace, and
harmony, and, knowing no wants, enjoy the perfection of content. Mr
Smollet calls him the admiral, because he insists upon steering his
pleasure-boat upon the lake; and he spends most of his time in ranging
through the woods, which he declares he enjoys as much as if they were
still his own property--I asked him the other day, if he was never sick,
and he answered, Yes; he had a slight fever the year before the union.
If he was not deaf, I should take much pleasure in his conversation; for
he is very intelligent, and his memory is surprisingly retentive--These
are the happy effects of temperance, exercise, and good nature--
Notwithstanding all his innocence, however, he was the cause of great
perturbation to my man Clinker, whose natural superstition has been
much injured, by the histories of witches, fairies, ghosts, and goblins,
which he has heard in this country--On the evening after our arrival,
Humphry strolled into the wood, in the course of his meditation, and all
at once the admiral stood before him, under the shadow of a spreading
oak. Though the fellow is far from being timorous in cases that are not
supposed preternatural, he could not stand the sight of this apparition,
but ran into the kitchen, with his hair standing on end, staring wildly,
and deprived of utterance. Mrs Jenkins, seeing him in this condition,
screamed aloud, 'Lord have mercy upon us, he has seen something!' Mrs
Tabitha was alarmed, and the whole house in confusion. When he was
recruited with a dram, I desired him to explain the meaning of all this
agitation; and, with some reluctance, he owned he had seen a spirit,
in the shape of an old man with a white beard, a black cap, and a plaid
night-gown. He was undeceived by the admiral in person, who, coming in
at this juncture, appeared to be a creature of real flesh and blood.

Do you know how we fare in this Scottish paradise? We make free with our
landlord's mutton, which is excellent, his poultry-yard, his garden,
his dairy, and his cellar, which are all well stored. We have delicious
salmon, pike, trout, perch, par, &c. at the door, for the taking. The
Frith of Clyde, on the other side of the hill, supplies us with mullet,
red and grey, cod, mackarel, whiting, and a variety of sea-fish,
including the finest fresh herrings I ever tasted. We have sweet, juicy
beef, and tolerable veal, with delicate bread from the little town of
Dunbritton; and plenty of partridge, growse, heath cock, and other game
in presents.

We have been visited by all the gentlemen in the neighbourhood, and they
have entertained us at their houses, not barely with hospitality, but
with such marks of cordial affection, as one would wish to find among
near relations, after an absence of many years.

I told you, in my last, I had projected an excursion to the Highlands,
which project I have now happily executed, under the auspices of Sir
George Colquhoun, a colonel in the Dutch service, who offered himself
as our conductor on this occasion. Leaving our women at Cameron, to
the care and inspection of Lady H-- C--, we set out on horseback for
Inverary, the county town of Argyle, and dined on the road with the
Laird of Macfarlane, the greatest genealogist I ever knew in any
country, and perfectly acquainted with all the antiquities of Scotland.

The Duke of Argyle has an old castle in Inverary, where he resides when
he is in Scotland; and hard by is the shell of a noble Gothic palace,
built by the last duke, which, when finished, will be a great ornament
to this part of the Highlands. As for Inverary, it is a place of very
little importance.

This country is amazingly wild, especially towards the mountains, which
are heaped upon the backs of one another, making a most stupendous
appearance of savage nature, with hardly any signs of cultivation, or
even of population. All is sublimity, silence, and solitude. The people
live together in glens or bottoms, where they are sheltered from the
cold and storms of winter: but there is a margin of plain ground spread
along the sea side, which is well inhabited and improved by the arts of
husbandry; and this I take to be one of the most agreeable tracts of the
whole island; the sea not only keeps it warm, and supplies it with fish,
but affords one of the most ravishing prospects in the whole world; I
mean the appearance of the Hebrides, or Western Islands to the number
of three hundred, scattered as far as the eye can reach, in the most
agreeable confusion. As the soil and climate of the Highlands are but
ill adapted to the cultivation of corn, the people apply themselves
chiefly to the breeding and feeding of black cattle, which turn to good
account. Those animals run wild all the winter, without any shelter or
subsistence, but what they can find among the heath. When the snow lies
so deep and hard, that they cannot penetrate to the roots of the grass,
they make a diurnal progress, guided by a sure instinct, to the seaside
at low water, where they feed on the alga marina, and other plants that
grow upon the beach.

Perhaps this branch of husbandry, which required very little attendance
and labour, is one of the principal causes of that idleness and want of
industry, which distinguishes these mountaineers in their own country.
When they come forth into the world, they become as diligent and alert
as any people upon earth. They are undoubtedly a very distinct species
from their fellow subjects of the Lowlands, against whom they indulge
an ancient spirit of animosity; and this difference is very discernible
even among persons of family and education. The Lowlanders are generally
cool and circumspect, the Highlanders fiery and ferocious:' but this
violence of their passions serves only to inflame the zeal of their
devotion to strangers, which is truly enthusiastic.

We proceeded about twenty miles beyond Inverary, to the house of a
gentleman, a friend of our conductor, where we stayed a few days, and
were feasted in such a manner, that I began to dread the consequence to
my constitution.

Notwithstanding the solitude that prevails among these mountains, there
is no want of people in the Highlands. I am credibly informed that the
duke of Argyle can assemble five thousand men in arms, of his own clan
and surname, which is Campbell; and there is besides a tribe of the same
appellation, whose chief' is the Earl of Breadalbine. The Macdonalds
are as numerous, and remarkably warlike: the Camerons, M'Leods, Frasers,
Grants, M'Kenzies, M'Kays, M'Phersons, M'Intoshes, are powerful clans;
so that if all the Highlanders, including the inhabitants of the Isles,
were united, they could bring into the field an army of forty thousand
fighting men, capable of undertaking the most dangerous enterprize. We
have lived to see four thousand of them, without discipline, throw
the whole kingdom of Great Britain into confusion. They attacked and
defeated two armies of regular troops accustomed to service. They
penetrated into the centre of England; and afterwards marched back
with deliberation, in the face of two other armies, through an enemy's
country, where every precaution was taken to cut off their retreat. I
know not any other people in Europe, who, without the use or knowledge
of arms, will attack regular forces sword in hand, if their chief
will head them in battle. When disciplined, they cannot fail of being
excellent soldiers. They do not walk like the generality of mankind, but
trot and bounce like deer, as if they moved upon springs. They greatly
excel the Lowlanders in all the exercises that require agility; they are
incredibly abstemious, and patient of hunger and fatigue,--so steeled
against the weather, that in travelling, even when the ground is covered
with snow, they never look for a house, or any other shelter but their
plaid, in which they wrap themselves up, and go to sleep under the cope
of heaven. Such people, in quality of soldiers, must be invincible,
when the business is to perform quick marches in a difficult country,
to strike sudden strokes, beat up the enemy's quarters, harrass their
cavalry, and perform expeditions without the formality of magazines,
baggage, forage, and artillery. The chieftainship of the Highlanders
is a very dangerous influence operating at the extremity of the island,
where the eyes and hands of government cannot be supposed to see [and]
act with precision and vigour. In order to break the force of clanship,
administration has always practised the political maxim, Divide et
impera. The legislature hath not only disarmed these mountaineers, but
also deprived them of their antient garb, which contributed in a great
measure to keep up their military spirit; and their slavish tenures are
all dissolved by act of parliament; so that they are at present as
free and independent of their chiefs, as the law can make them: but the
original attachment still remains, and is founded on something prior to
the feudal system, about which the writers of this age have made such a
pother, as if it was a new discovery, like the Copernican system. Every
peculiarity of policy, custom, and even temperament, is affectedly
traced to this origin, as if the feudal constitution had not been common
to almost all the natives of Europe. For my part, I expect to see the
use of trunk-hose and buttered ale ascribed to the influence of the
feudal system. The connection between the clans and their chiefs is,
without all doubt, patriarchal. It is founded on hereditary regard
and affection, cherished through a long succession of ages. The clan
consider the chief as their father, they bear his name, they believe
themselves descended from his family, and they obey him as their lord,
with all the ardour of filial love and veneration; while he, on his
part, exerts a paternal authority, commanding, chastising, rewarding,
protecting, and maintaining them as his own children. If the legislature
would entirely destroy this connection, it must compel the Highlanders
to change their habitation and their names. Even this experiment has
been formerly tried without success--In the reign of James VI a battle
was fought within a few short miles of this place, between two clans,
the M'Gregors and the Colquhouns, in which the latter were defeated: the
Laird of M'Gregor made such a barbarous use of his victory, that he was
forfeited and outlawed by act of parliament: his lands were given to the
family of Montrose, and his clan were obliged to change their name.
They obeyed so far, as to call themselves severally Campbell, Graham, or
Drummond, the surnames of the families of Argyle, Montrose, and Perth,
that they might enjoy the protection of those houses; but they still
added M'Gregor to their new appellation; and as their chief was deprived
of his estate, they robbed and plundered for his subsistence.--Mr
Cameron of Lochiel, the chief of that clan, whose father was attainted
for having been concerned in the last rebellion, returning from France
in obedience to a proclamation and act of parliament, passed at the
beginning of the late war, payed a visit to his own country, and hired a
farm in the neighbourhood of his father's house, which had been burnt
to the ground. The clan, though ruined and scattered, no sooner heard of
his arrival than they flocked to him from all quarters, to welcome his
return, and in a few days stocked his farm with seven hundred black
cattle, which they had saved in the general wreck of their affairs: but
their beloved chief, who was a promising youth, did not live to enjoy
the fruits of their fidelity and attachment.

The most effectual method I know to weaken, and at length destroy this
influence, is to employ the commonalty in such a manner as to give them
a taste of property and independence. In vain the government grants them
advantageous leases on the forfeited estates, if they have no property
to prosecute the means of improvement--The sea is an inexhaustible fund
of riches; but the fishery cannot be carried on without vessels, casks,
salt, lines, nets, and other tackle. I conversed with a sensible man of
this country, who, from a real spirit of patriotism had set up a fishery
on the coast, and a manufacture of coarse linen, for the employment of
the poor Highlanders. Cod is here in such plenty, that he told me he
had seen several hundred taken on one line, at one hawl--It must be
observed, however, that the line was of immense length, and had two
thousand hooks, baited with muscles; but the fish was so superior to
the cod caught on the banks of Newfoundland, that his correspondent at
Lisbon sold them immediately at his own price, although Lent was just
over when they arrived, and the people might be supposed quite cloyed
with this kind of diet--His linen manufacture was likewise in a
prosperous way, when the late war intervening, all his best hands were
pressed into the service.

It cannot be expected, that the gentlemen of this country should execute
commercial schemes to render their vassals independent; nor, indeed, are
such schemes suited to their way of life and inclination; but a company
of merchants might, with proper management, turn to good account a
fishery established in this part of Scotland--Our people have a strange
itch to colonize America, when the uncultivated parts of our own island
might be settled to greater advantage.

After having rambled through the mountains and glens of Argyle, we
visited the adjacent islands of Ila, Jura, Mull, and Icomkill. In the
first, we saw the remains of a castle, built in a lake, where Macdonald,
lord or king of the isles, formerly resided. Jura is famous for having
given birth to one Mackcrain, who lived one hundred and eighty years
in one house, and died in the reign of Charles the Second. Mull affords
several bays, where there is safe anchorage: in one of which, the
Florida, a ship of the Spanish armada, was blown up by one of Mr
Smollett's ancestors--About forty years ago, John duke of Argyle is
said to have consulted the Spanish registers, by which it appeared,
that this ship had the military chest on board--He employed experienced
divers to examine the wreck; and they found the hull of the vessel still
entire, but so covered with sand, that they could not make their way
between decks; however, they picked up several pieces of plate, that
were scattered about in the bay, and a couple of fine brass cannon.

Icolmkill, or Iona, is a small island which St Columba chose for his
habitation--It was respected for its sanctity, and college or seminary
of ecclesiastics--Part of its church is still standing, with the
tombs of several Scottish, Irish, and Danish sovereigns, who were
here interred--These islanders are very bold and dexterous watermen,
consequently the better adapted to the fishery: in their manners they
are less savage and impetuous than their countrymen on the continent;
and they speak the Erse or Gaelick in its greatest purity.

Having sent round our horses by land, we embarked in the distinct of
Cowal, for Greenock, which is a neat little town, on the other side of
the Frith, with a curious harbour formed by three stone jetties, carried
out a good way into the sea--Newport-Glasgow is such another place,
about two miles higher up. Both have a face of business and plenty, and
are supported entirely by the shipping of Glasgow, of which I counted
sixty large vessels in these harbours--Taking boat again at Newport,
we were in less than an hour landed on the other side, within two short
miles of our head-quarters, where we found our women in good health and
spirits. They had been two days before joined by Mr. Smollett and his
lady, to whom we have such obligations as I cannot mention, even to you,
without blushing.

To-morrow we shall bid adieu to the Scotch Arcadia, and begin our
progress to the southward, taking our way by Lanerk and Nithsdale,
to the west borders of England. I have received so much advantage and
satisfaction from this tour, that if my health suffers no revolution in
the winter, I believe I shall be tempted to undertake another
expedition to the Northern extremity of Caithness, unencumbered by those
impediments which now clog the heels of,

Yours, MATT. BRAMBLE CAMERON, Sept. 6.




To Miss LAETITIA WILLIS, at Gloucester.

MY DEAREST LETTY,

Never did poor prisoner long for deliverance, more than I have longed
for an opportunity to disburthen my cares into your friendly bosom;
and the occasion which now presents itself, is little less than
miraculous--Honest Saunders Macawly, the travelling Scotchman, who goes
every year to Wales, is now at Glasgow, buying goods, and coming to pay
his respects to our family, has undertaken to deliver this letter
into your own hand--We have been six weeks in Scotland, and seen the
principal towns of the kingdom, where we have been treated with
great civility--The people are very courteous; and the country being
exceedingly romantic, suits my turn and inclinations--I contracted some
friendships at Edinburgh, which is a large and lofty city, full of gay
company; and, in particular, commenced an intimate correspondence with
one miss R--t--n, an amiable young lady of my own age, whose charms
seemed to soften, and even to subdue the stubborn heart of my brother
Jery; but he no sooner left the place than he relapsed into his former
insensibility--I feel, however, that this indifference is not the family
constitution--I never admitted but one idea of love, and that has taken
such root in my heart, as to be equally proof against all the pulls of
discretion, and the frosts of neglect.

Dear Letty! I had an alarming adventure at the hunters ball in
Edinburgh--While I sat discoursing with a friend in a corner, all at
once the very image of Wilson stood before me, dressed exactly as he was
in the character of Aimwell! It was one Mr Gordon, whom I had not seen
before--Shocked at the sudden apparition, I fainted away, and threw the
whole assembly in confusion--However, the cause of my disorder remained
a secret to every body but my brother, who was likewise struck with
the resemblance, and scolded after we came home--I am very sensible
of Jery's affection, and know he spoke as well with a view to my own
interest and happiness, as in regard to the honour of the family; but
I cannot bear to have my wounds probed severely--I was not so much
affected by the censure he passed upon my own indiscretion, as with the
reflection he made on the conduct of Wilson. He observed, that if he
was really the gentleman he pretended to be, and harboured nothing but
honourable designs, he would have vindicated his pretensions in the face
of day--This remark made a deep impression upon my mind--I endeavoured
to conceal my thoughts; and this endeavour had a bad effect upon my
health and spirits; so it was thought necessary that I should go to the
Highlands, and drink the goat-milk-whey.

We went accordingly to Lough Lomond, one of the most enchanting spots
in the whole world; and what with this remedy, which I had every morning
fresh from the mountains, and the pure air, and chearful company, I
have recovered my flesh and appetite; though there is something still
at bottom, which it is not in the power of air, exercise, company, or
medicine to remove--These incidents would not touch me so nearly, if I
had a sensible confidant to sympathize with my affliction, and comfort
me with wholesome advice--I have nothing of this kind, except Win
Jenkins, who is really a good body in the main, but very ill qualified
for such an office--The poor creature is weak in her nerves, as well
as in her understanding; otherwise I might have known the true name and
character of that unfortunate youth--But why do I call him unfortunate?
perhaps the epithet is more applicable to me for having listened to the
false professions of--But, hold! I have as yet no right, and sure I have
no inclination to believe any thing to the prejudice of his honour--In
that reflection I shall still exert my patience. As for Mrs Jenkins, she
herself is really an object of compassion--Between vanity, methodism,
and love, her head is almost turned. I should have more regard for her,
however, if she had been more constant in the object of her affection;
but, truly, she aimed at conquest, and flirted at the same time with my
uncle's footman, Humphrey Clinker, who is really a deserving young man,
and one Dutton, my brother's valet de chambre, a debauched fellow; who,
leaving Win in the lurch, ran away with another man's bride at Berwick.

My dear Willis, I am truly ashamed of my own sex--We complain of
advantages which the men take of our youth, inexperience, insensibility,
and all that; but I have seen enough to believe, that our sex in general
make it their business to ensnare the other; and for this purpose,
employ arts which are by no means to be justified--In point of
constancy, they certainly have nothing to reproach the male part of
the creation--My poor aunt, without any regard to her years and
imperfections, has gone to market with her charms in every place where
she thought she had the least chance to dispose of her person, which,
however, hangs still heavy on her hands--I am afraid she has used even
religion as a decoy, though it has not answered her expectation--She has
been praying, preaching, and catechising among the methodists, with
whom this country abounds; and pretends to have such manifestations and
revelations, as even Clinker himself can hardly believe, though the poor
fellow is half crazy with enthusiasm. As for Jenkins, she affects
to take all her mistress's reveries for gospel. She has also her
heart-heavings and motions of the spirit; and God forgive me if I think
uncharitably, but all this seems to me to be downright hypocrisy and
deceit--Perhaps, indeed, the poor girl imposes on herself--She is
generally in a flutter, and is much subject to vapours--Since we came
to Scotland, she has seen apparitions, and pretends to prophesy--If I
could put faith in all these supernatural visitations, I should think
myself abandoned of grace; for I have neither seen, heard, nor felt
anything of this nature, although I endeavour to discharge the duties
of religion with all the sincerity, zeal, and devotion, that is in the
power of,

Dear Letty, your ever affectionate, LYDIA MELFORD GLASGOW, Sept. 7.

We are so far on our return to Brambleton-hall; and I would fain hope
we shall take Gloucester in our way, in which case I shall have the
inexpressible pleasure of embracing my dear Willis--Pray remember me to
my worthy governess.




To Mrs MARY JONES, at Brambleton-hall.

DEAR MARY,

Sunders Macully, the Scotchman, who pushes directly for Vails, has
promised to give it you into your own hand, and therefore I would not
miss the opportunity to let you know as I am still in the land of the
living: and yet I have been on the brink of the other world since I sent
you my last letter.--We went by sea to another kingdom called Fife, and
coming back, had like to have gone to pot in a storm.--What between the
frite and sickness, I thought I should have brought my heart up; even
Mr Clinker was not his own man for eight and forty hours after we
got ashore. It was well for some folks that we scaped drownding; for
mistress was very frexious, and seemed but indifferently prepared for
a change; but, thank God, she was soon put in a better frame by the
private exaltations of the reverend Mr Macrocodile.--We afterwards
churned to Starling and Grascow, which are a kiple of handsome towns;
and then we went to a gentleman's house at Loff-Loming, which is a
wonderful sea of fresh water, with a power of hylands in the midst
on't.--They say as how it has n'er a bottom, and was made by a musician
and, truly, I believe it; for it is not in the coarse of nature.--It has
got waves without wind, fish without fins, and a floating hyland; and
one of them is a crutch-yard, where the dead are buried; and always
before the person dies, a bell rings of itself to give warning.

O Mary! this is the land of congyration--The bell knolled when we
were there--I saw lights, and heard lamentations.--The gentleman, our
landlord, has got another house, which he was fain to quit, on account
of a mischievous ghost, that would not suffer people to lie in their
beds. The fairies dwell in a hole of Kairmann, a mounting hard by; and
they steal away the good women that are in the straw, if so be as how
there a'n't a horshoe nailed to the door: and I was shewn an ould vitch,
called Elspath Ringavey, with a red petticoat, bleared eyes, and a mould
of grey bristles on her sin.--That she mought do me no harm, I crossed
her hand with a taster, and bid her tell my fortune; and she told me
such things descriving Mr Clinker to a hair--but it shall ne'er be said,
that I minchioned a word of the matter.--As I was troubled with fits,
she advised me to bathe in the loff, which was holy water; and so I
went in the morning to a private place along with the house-maid, and
we bathed in our birth-day soot, after the fashion of the country; and
behold whilst we dabbled in the loff, sir George Coon started up with a
gun; but we clapt our hands to our faces, and passed by him to the place
where we had left our smocks--A civil gentleman would have turned his
head another way.--My comfit is, he knew not which was which; and, as
the saying is, all cats in the dark are grey--Whilst we stayed at
Loff-Loming, he and our two squires went three or four days churning
among the wild men of the mountings; a parcel of selvidges that lie in
caves among the rocks, devour young children, speak Velch, but the vords
are different. Our ladies would not part with Mr Clinker, because he is
so stout and so pyehouse, that he fears neither man nor devils, if so be
as they don't take him by surprise.--Indeed, he was once so flurried by
an operition, that he had like to have sounded.--He made believe as if
it had been the ould edmiral; but the old edmiral could not have made
his air to stand on end, and his teeth to shatter; but he said so in
prudence, that the ladies mought not be afear'd. Miss Liddy has been
puny, and like to go into a decline--I doubt her pore art is too
tinder--but the got's-fey has set her on her legs again.--You nows
got's-fey is mother's milk to a Velch woman. As for mistress, blessed be
God, she ails nothing.--Her stomick is good, and she improves in grease
and godliness; but, for all that, she may have infections like other
people, and I believe, she wouldn't be sorry to be called your ladyship,
whenever sir George thinks proper to ax the question--But, for my part,
whatever I may see or hear, not a praticle shall ever pass the lips of,

Dear Molly, Your loving friend, WIN. JENKINS GRASCO, Sept. 7.

Remember me, as usual, to Sall.--We are now coming home, though not the
nearest road.--I do suppose, I shall find the kitten a fine boar at my
return.




To Sir WATKIN PHILLIPS, Bart. at Oxon.

DEAR KNIGHT,

Once more I tread upon English ground, which I like not the worse for
the six weeks' ramble I have made among the woods and mountains of
Caledonia; no offence to the land of cakes, where bannocks grow upon
straw. I never saw my uncle in such health and spirits as he now enjoys.
Liddy is perfectly recovered; and Mrs Tabitha has no reason to complain.
Nevertheless, I believe, she was, till yesterday, inclined to give the
whole Scotch nation to the devil, as a pack of insensible brutes, upon
whom her accomplishments had been displayed in vain.--At every place
where we halted, did she mount the stage, and flourished her rusty arms,
without being able to make one conquest. One of her last essays was
against the heart of Sir George Colquhoun, with whom she fought all
the weapons more than twice over.--She was grave and gay by turns--she
moralized and methodized--she laughed, and romped, and danced, and sung,
and sighed, and ogled, and lisped, and fluttered, and flattered--but all
was preaching to the desart. The baronet, being a well-bred man, carried
his civilities as far as she could in conscience expect, and, if evil
tongues are to be believed, some degrees farther; but he was too much a
veteran in gallantry, as well as in war, to fall into any ambuscade that
she could lay for his affection--While we were absent in the Highlands,
she practised also upon the laird of Ladrishmore, and even gave him
the rendezvous in the wood of Drumscailloch; but the laird had such
a reverend care of his own reputation, that he came attended with the
parson of the parish, and nothing passed but spiritual communication.
After all these miscarriages, our aunt suddenly recollected lieutenant
Lismahago, whom, ever since our first arrival at Edinburgh, she seemed
to have utterly forgot; but now she expressed her hopes of seeing him at
Dumfries, according to his promise.

We set out from Glasgow by the way of Lanerk, the county-town of
Clydesdale, in the neighbourhood of which, the whole river Clyde,
rushing down a steep rock, forms a very noble and stupendous cascade.
Next day we were obliged to halt in a small borough, until the carriage,
which had received some damage, should be repaired; and here we met
with an incident which warmly interested the benevolent spirit of Mr
Bramble--As we stood at the window of an inn that fronted the public
prison, a person arrived on horseback, genteelly, tho' plainly, dressed
in a blue frock, with his own hair cut short, and a gold-laced hat upon
his head.--Alighting, and giving his horse to the landlord, he advanced
to an old man who was at work in paving the street, and accosted him in
these words: 'This is hard work for such an old man as you.'--So
saying, he took the instrument out of his hand, and began to thump the
pavement.--After a few strokes, 'Have you never a son (said he) to ease
you of this labour?' 'Yes, an please Your honour (replied the senior),
I have three hopeful lads, but, at present, they are out of the way.'
'Honour not me (cried the stranger); but more becomes me to honour your
grey hairs. Where are those sons you talk of?' The ancient paviour said,
his eldest son was a captain in the East Indies; and the youngest had
lately inlisted as a soldier, in hopes of prospering like his brother.
The gentleman desiring to know what was become of the second, he wiped
his eyes, and owned, he had taken upon him his old father's debts, for
which he was now in the prison hard by.

The traveller made three quick steps towards the jail, then turning
short, 'Tell me (said he), has that unnatural captain sent you nothing
to relieve your distress?' 'Call him not unnatural (replied the other);
God's blessing be upon him! he sent me a great deal of money; but I made
a bad use of it; I lost it by being security for a gentleman that was
my landlord, and was stript of all I had in the world besides.' At that
instant a young man, thrusting out his head and neck between two iron
bars in the prison-window, exclaimed, 'Father! father! if my brother
William is in life, that's he!' 'I am!--I am!--(cried the stranger,
clasping the old man in his arms, and shedding a flood of tears)--I
am your son Willy, sure enough!' Before the father, who was quite
confounded, could make any return to this tenderness, a decent old woman
bolting out from the door of a poor habitation, cried, 'Where is my
bairn? where is my dear Willy?'--The captain no sooner beheld her, than
he quitted his father, and ran into her embrace.

I can assure you, my uncle, who saw and heard every thing that passed,
was as much moved as any one of the parties concerned in this pathetic
recognition--He sobbed, and wept, and clapped his hands, and hollowed,
and finally ran down into the street. By this time, the captain had
retired with his parents, and all the inhabitants of the place were
assembled at the door.--Mr Bramble, nevertheless, pressed thro' the
crowd, and entering the house, 'Captain (said he), I beg the favour of
your acquaintance. I would have travelled a hundred miles to see this
affecting scene; and I shall think myself happy if you and your parents
will dine with me at the public house.' The captain thanked him for his
kind invitation, which, he said, he would accept with pleasure; but in
the mean time, he could not think of eating or drinking, while his poor
brother was in trouble. He forthwith deposited a sum equal to the debt
in the hands of the magistrate, who ventured to set his brother at
liberty without farther process; and then the whole family repaired to
the inn with my uncle, attended by the crowd, the individuals of which
shook their townsman by the hand, while he returned their caresses
without the least sign of pride or affectation.

This honest favourite of fortune, whose name was Brown, told my uncle,
that he had been bred a weaver, and, about eighteen years ago, had,
from a spirit of idleness and dissipation, enlisted as a soldier in the
service of the East-India company; that, in the course of duty, he had
the good fortune to attract the notice and approbation of Lord Clive,
who preferred him from one step to another, till he attained the rank
of captain and pay-master to the regiment, in which capacities he
had honestly amassed above twelve thousand pounds, and, at the peace,
resigned his commission.--He had sent several remittances to his father,
who received the first only, consisting of one hundred pounds; the
second had fallen into the hands of a bankrupt; and the third had been
consigned to a gentleman of Scotland, who died before it arrived; so
that it still remained to be accounted for by his executors. He now
presented the old man with fifty pounds for his present occasions, over
and above bank notes for one hundred, which he had deposited for his
brother's release.--He brought along with him a deed ready executed, by
which he settled a perpetuity of four-score pounds upon his parents, to
be inherited by their other two sons after their decease.--He promised
to purchase a commission for his youngest brother; to take the other as
his own partner in a manufacture which he intended to set up, to give
employment and bread to the industrious; and to give five hundred
pounds, by way of dower, to his sister, who had married a farmer in low
circumstances. Finally, he gave fifty pounds to the poor of the town
where he was born, and feasted all the inhabitants without exception.

My uncle was so charmed with the character of captain Brown, that he
drank his health three times successively at dinner--He said, he was
proud of his acquaintance; that he was an honour to his country, and
had in some measure redeemed human nature from the reproach of pride,
selfishness, and ingratitude.--For my part, I was as much pleased
with the modesty as with the filial virtue of this honest soldier,
who assumed no merit from his success, and said very little of his own
transactions, though the answers he made to our inquiries were equally
sensible and laconic, Mrs Tabitha behaved very graciously to him until
she understood that he was going to make a tender of his hand to a
person of low estate, who had been his sweet-heart while he worked as
a journeyman weaver.--Our aunt was no sooner made acquainted with this
design, than she starched up her behaviour with a double proportion of
reserve; and when the company broke up, she observed with a toss of her
nose, that Brown was a civil fellow enough, considering the lowness of
his original; but that Fortune, though she had mended his circumstances,
was incapable to raise his ideas, which were still humble and plebeian.

On the day that succeeded this adventure, we went some miles out of our
road to see Drumlanrig, a seat belonging to the duke of Queensberry,
which appears like a magnificent palace erected by magic, in the midst
of a wilderness.--It is indeed a princely mansion, with suitable parks
and plantations, rendered still more striking by the nakedness of
the surrounding country, which is one of the wildest tracts in all
Scotland.--This wildness, however, is different from that of the
Highlands; for here the mountains, instead of heath, are covered with a
fine green swarth, affording pasture to innumerable flocks of sheep. But
the fleeces of this country, called Nithsdale, are not comparable to the
wool of Galloway, which is said to equal that of Salisbury plain. Having
passed the night at the castle of Drumlanrig, by invitation from
the duke himself, who is one of the best men that ever breathed, we
prosecuted our journey to Dumfries, a very elegant trading town near
the borders of England, where we found plenty of good provision and
excellent wine, at very reasonable prices, and the accommodation as good
in all respects as in any part of South-Britain. If I was confined to
Scotland for life, I would chuse Dumfries as the place of my residence.
Here we made enquiries about captain Lismahago, of whom hearing no
tidings, we proceeded by the Solway Frith, to Carlisle. You must know,
that the Solway sands, upon which travellers pass at low water, are
exceedingly dangerous, because, as the tide makes, they become quick
in different places, and the flood rushes in so impetuously, that the
passengers are often overtaken by the sea and perish.

In crossing these treacherous Syrtes with a guide, we perceived a
drowned horse, which Humphry Clinker, after due inspection, declared to
be the very identical beast which Mr Lismahago rode when he parted with
us at Feltonbridge in Northumberland. This information, which seemed
to intimate that our friend the lieutenant had shared the fate of his
horse, affected us all, and above all our aunt Tabitha, who shed salt
tears, and obliged Clinker to pull a few hairs out of the dead horse's
tail, to be worn in a ring as a remembrance of his master: but her grief
and ours was not of long duration; for one of the first persons we saw
in Carlisle, was the lieutenant in propria persona, bargaining with
a horse-dealer for another steed, in the yard of the inn where we
alighted.--Mrs Bramble was the first that perceived him, and screamed
as if she had seen a ghost; and, truly, at a proper time and place, he
might very well have passed for an inhabitant of another world; for
he was more meagre and grim than before.--We received him the more
cordially for having supposed he had been drowned; and he was not
deficient in expressions of satisfaction at this meeting. He told us,
he had enquired for us at Dumfries, and been informed by a travelling
merchant from Glasgow, that we had resolved to return by the way of
Coldstream. He said, that in passing the sands without a guide, his
horse had knocked up, and he himself must have perished, if he had not
been providentially relieved by a return post-chaise.--He moreover gave
us to understand, that his scheme of settling in his own country having
miscarried, he was so far on his way to London, with a view to embark
for North-America, where he intended to pass the rest of his days among
his old friends the Miamis, and amuse himself in finishing the education
of the son he had by his beloved Squinkinacoosta.

This project was by no means agreeable to our good aunt, who expatiated
upon the fatigues and dangers that would attend such a long voyage
by sea, and afterwards such a tedious journey by land--She enlarged
particularly on the risque he would run, with respect to the concerns
of his precious soul, among savages who had not yet received the glad
tidings of salvation; and she hinted that his abandoning Great-Britain
might, perhaps, prove fatal to the inclinations of some deserving
person, whom he was qualified to make happy for life. My uncle, who is
really a Don Quixote in generosity, understanding that Lismahago's real
reason for leaving Scotland was the impossibility of subsisting in it
with any decency upon the wretched provision of a subaltern's half-pay,
began to be warmly interested on the side of compassion.--He thought
it very hard, that a gentleman who had served his country with honour,
should be driven by necessity to spend his old age, among the refuse of
mankind, in such a remote part of the world.--He discoursed with me upon
the subject; observing, that he would willingly offer the lieutenant an
asylum at Brambleton-hall, if he did not foresee that his singularities
and humour of contradiction would render him an intolerable housemate,
though his conversation at some times might be both instructive and
entertaining: but, as there seemed to be something particular in
his attention to Mrs Tabitha, he and I agreed in opinion, that this
intercourse should be encouraged and improved, if possible, into a
matrimonial union; in which case there would be a comfortable provision
for both; and they might be settled in a house of their own, so that Mr
Bramble should have no more of their company than he desired.

In pursuance of this design, Lismahago has been invited to pass the
winter at Brambleton-hall, as it will be time enough to execute his
American project in the spring.--He has taken time to consider of this
proposal; mean while, he will keep us company as far as we travel in the
road to Bristol, where he has hopes of getting a passage for America.
I make no doubt but that he will postpone his voyage, and prosecute his
addresses to a happy consummation; and sure, if it produces any
fruit, it must be of a very peculiar flavour. As the weather continues
favourable, I believe, we shall take the Peak of Derbyshire and Buxton
Wells in our way.--At any rate, from the first place where we make any
stay, you shall hear again from

Yours always, J. MELFORD CARLISLE, Sep. 12.




To Dr LEWIS.

DEAR DOCTOR,

The peasantry of Scotland are certainly on a poor footing all over the
kingdom; and yet they look better, and are better cloathed than those
of the same rank in Burgundy, and many other places of France and Italy;
nay, I will venture to say they are better fed, notwithstanding
the boasted wine of these foreign countries. The country people of
North-Britain live chiefly on oat-meal, and milk, cheese, butter,
and some garden-stuff, with now and then a pickled-herring, by way of
delicacy; but flesh-meat they seldom or never taste; nor any kind of
strong liquor, except two-penny, at times of uncommon festivity--Their
breakfast is a kind of hasty pudding, of oat-meal or pease-meal, eaten
with milk. They have commonly pottage for dinner, composed of cale or
cole, leeks, barley or big, and butter; and this is reinforced with
bread and cheese, made of skimmed-milk--At night they sup on sowens or
flummery of oat-meal--In a scarcity of oats, they use the meal of barley
and pease, which is both nourishing and palatable. Some of them have
potatoes; and you find parsnips in every peasant's garden--They are
cloathed with a coarse kind of russet of their own making, which is
both decent and warm--They dwell in poor huts, built of loose stones and
turf, without any mortar, having a fireplace or hearth in the middle,
generally made of an old mill-stone, and a hole at top to let out the
smoke.

These people, however, are content, and wonderfully sagacious--All of
them read the Bible, and are even qualified to dispute upon the
articles of their faith; which in those parts I have seen, is entirely
Presbyterian. I am told, that the inhabitants of Aberdeenshire are still
more acute. I once knew a Scotch gentleman at London, who had declared
war against this part of his countrymen; and swore that the impudence
and knavery of the Scots, in that quarter, had brought a reproach upon
the whole nation.

The river Clyde, above Glasgow, is quite pastoral; and the banks of it
are every where adorned with fine villas. From the sea to its source,
we may reckon the seats of many families of the first rank, such as the
duke of Argyle at Roseneath, the earl of Bute in the isle of that name,
the earl of Glencairn at Finlayston, lord Blantyre at Areskine, the
dutchess of Douglas at Bothwell, duke Hamilton at Hamilton, the duke of
Douglas at Douglas, and the earl of Hyndford at Carmichael. Hamilton is
a noble palace, magnificently furnished; and hard by is the village of
that name, one of the neatest little towns I have seen in any country.
The old castle of Douglas being burned to the ground by accident, the
late duke resolved, as head of the first family of Scotland, to have the
largest house in the kingdom, and ordered a plan for this purpose; but
there was only one wing of it finished when he died. It is to be hoped
that his nephew, who is now in possession of his great fortune, will
complete the design of his predecessor--Clydesdale is in general
populous and rich, containing a great number of gentlemen, who
are independent in their fortune; but it produces more cattle than
corn--This is also the case with Tweedale, through part of which
we passed, and Nithsdale, which is generally rough, wild, and
mountainous--These hills are covered with sheep; and this is the small
delicious mutton, so much preferable to that of the London-market. As
their feeding costs so little, the sheep are not killed till five years
old, when their flesh, juices, and flavour are in perfection; but their
fleeces are much damaged by the tar, with which they are smeared to
preserve them from the rot in winter, during which they run wild night
and day, and thousands are lost under huge wreaths of snow--'Tis pity
the farmers cannot contrive some means to shelter this useful animal
from the inclemencies of a rigorous climate, especially from the
perpetual rains, which are more prejudicial than the greatest extremity
of cold weather.

On the little river Nid, is situated the castle of Drumlanrig, one
of the noblest seats in Great-Britain, belonging to the duke of
Queensberry; one of those few noblemen whose goodness of heart does
honour to human-nature--I shall not pretend to enter into a description
of this palace, which is really an instance of the sublime in
magnificence, as well as in situation, and puts one in mind of the
beautiful city of Palmyra, rising like a vision in the midst of
the wilderness. His grace keeps open house, and lives with great
splendour--He did us the honour to receive us with great courtesy, and
detain'd us all night, together with above twenty other guests, with all
their servants and horses to a very considerable number--The dutchess
was equally gracious, and took our ladies under her immediate
protection. The longer I live, I see more reason to believe that
prejudices of education are never wholly eradicated, even when they
are discovered to be erroneous and absurd. Such habits of thinking as
interest the grand passions, cleave to the human heart in such a manner,
that though an effort of reason may force them from their hold for a
moment, this violence no sooner ceases, than they resume their grasp
with an increased elasticity and adhesion.

I am led into this reflection, by what passed at the duke's table after
supper. The conversation turned upon the vulgar notions of spirits and
omens, that prevail among the commonalty of North-Britain, and all the
company agreed, that nothing could be more ridiculous. One gentleman,
however, told a remarkable story of himself, by way of speculation
'Being on a party of hunting in the North (said he), I resolved to visit
an old friend, whom I had not seen for twenty years--So long he had been
retired and sequestered from all his acquaintance, and lived in a moping
melancholy way, much afflicted with lowness of spirits, occasioned by
the death of his wife, whom he had loved with uncommon affection. As he
resided in a remote part of the country, and we were five gentlemen with
as many servants, we carried some provision with us from the next market
town, lest we should find him unprepared for our reception. The roads
being bad, we did not arrive at the house till two o'clock in the
afternoon; and were agreeably surprised to find a very good dinner ready
in the kitchen, and the cloth laid with six covers. My friend himself
appeared in his best apparel at the gate, and received us with open
arms, telling me he had been expecting us these two hours. Astonished at
this declaration, I asked who had given him intelligence of our coming?
and he smiled without making any other reply. However, presuming upon
our former intimacy, I afterwards insisted upon knowing; and he told me,
very gravely, he had seen me in a vision of the second sight--Nay, he
called in the evidence of his steward, who solemnly declared, that his
master had the day before apprised him of my coming, with four other
strangers, and ordered him to provide accordingly; in consequence of
which intimation, he had prepared the dinner which we were now eating;
and laid the covers according to the number foretold.' The incident
we all owned to be remarkable, and I endeavoured to account for it by
natural means. I observed, that as the gentleman was of a visionary
turn, the casual idea, or remembrance of his old friend, might suggest
those circumstances, which accident had for once realized; but that in
all probability he had seen many visions of the same kind, which were
never verified. None of the company directly dissented from my opinion;
but from the objections that were hinted, I could plainly perceive that
the majority were persuaded there was something more extraordinary in
the case.

Another gentleman of the company, addressing himself to me, 'Without all
doubt (said he), a diseased imagination is very apt to produce visions;
but we must find some other method to account for something of this
kind, that happened within these eight days in my neighbourhood--A
gentleman of a good family, who cannot be deemed a visionary in any
sense of the word, was near his own gate, in the twilight, visited by
his grandfather, who has been dead these fifteen years--The spectre was
mounted seemingly on the very horse he used to ride, with an angry and
terrible countenance, and said something, which his grandson, in the
confusion of fear, could not understand. But this was not all--He lifted
up a huge horse whip, and applied it with great violence to his back
and shoulders, on which I saw the impression with my own eyes. The
apparition was afterwards seen by the sexton of the parish, hovering
about the tomb where his body lies interred; as the man declared to
several persons in the village, before he knew what had happened to the
gentleman--Nay, he actually came to me as a justice of the peace, in
order to make oath of these particulars, which, however, I declined
administering. As for the grandson of the defunct, he is a sober,
sensible, worldly minded fellow, too intent upon schemes of interest to
give in to reveries. He would have willingly concealed the affair; but
he bawled out in the first transport of his fear, and, running into
the house, exposed his back and his sconce to the whole family; so that
there was no denying it in the sequel. It is now the common discourse of
the country, that this appearance and behaviour of the old man's spirit,
portends some great calamity to the family, and the good-woman has
actually taken to her bed in this apprehension.'

Though I did not pretend to explain this mystery, I said, I did not at
all doubt, but it would one day appear to be a deception; and, in all
probability, a scheme executed by some enemy of the person who had
sustained the assault; but still the gentleman insisted upon the
clearness of the evidence, and the concurrence of testimony, by which
two creditable witnesses, without any communication one with another,
affirmed the appearance of the same man, with whose person they were
both well acquainted--From Drumlanrig we pursued the course of the Nid
to Dumfries, which stands seven miles above the place where the river
falls into the sea; and is, after Glasgow, the handsomest town I have
seen in Scotland. The inhabitants, indeed, seem to have proposed that
city as their model; not only in beautifying their town and regulating
its police, but, also in prosecuting their schemes of commerce and
manufacture, by which they are grown rich and opulent.

We re-entered England, by the way of Carlisle, where we accidentally
met with our friend Lismahago, whom we had in vain inquired after at
Dumfries and other places--It would seem that the captain, like the
prophets of old, is but little honoured in his own country, which he
has now renounced for ever--He gave me the following particulars of his
visit to his native soil--In his way to the place of his nativity, he
learned that his nephew had married the daughter of a burgeois, who
directed a weaving manufacture, and had gone into partnership with his
father-in-law: chagrined with this information, he had arrived at the
gate in the twilight, where he heard the sound of treddles in the great
hall, which had exasperated him to such a degree, that he had like to
have lost his senses: while he was thus transported with indignation,
his nephew chanced to come forth, when, being no longer master of his
passion, he cried, 'Degenerate rascal! you have made my father's house a
den of thieves;' and at the same time chastised him with his
horse-whip; then, riding round the adjoining village, he had visited
the burying-ground of his ancestors by moon-light; and, having paid
his respects to their manes, travelled all night to another part of
the country--Finding the head of the family in such a disgraceful
situation, all his own friends dead or removed from the places of their
former residence, and the expence of living increased to double of what
it had been, when he first left his native country, he had bid it an
eternal adieu, and was determined to seek for repose among the forests
of America.

I was no longer at a loss to account for the apparition, which had
been described at Drumlanrig; and when I repeated the story to the
lieutenant, he was much pleased to think his resentment had been so much
more effectual than he intended; and he owned, he might at such an hour,
and in such an equipage, very well pass for the ghost of his father,
whom he was said greatly to resemble--Between friends, I fancy Lismahago
will find a retreat without going so far as the wigwams of the Miamis.
My sister Tabby is making continual advances to him, in the way of
affection; and, if I may trust to appearances, the captain is disposed
to take opportunity by the forelock. For my part, I intend to encourage
this correspondence, and shall be glad to see them united--In that case,
we shall find a way to settle them comfortably in our own neighbourhood.
I, and my servants, will get rid of a very troublesome and tyrannic
gouvernante; and I shall have the benefit of Lismahago's conversation,
without being obliged to take more of his company than I desire; for
though an olla is a high-flavoured dish, I could not bear to dine upon
it every day of my life.

I am much pleased with Manchester, which is one of the most agreeable
and flourishing towns in Great-Britain; and I perceive that this is
the place which hath animated the spirit, and suggested the chief
manufactures of Glasgow. We propose to visit Chatsworth, the Peak,
and Buxton, from which last place we shall proceed directly homewards,
though by easy journies. If the season has been as favourable in Wales
as in the North, your harvest is happily finished; and we have nothing
left to think of but our October, of which let Barns be properly
reminded. You will find me much better in flesh than I was at our
parting; and this short separation has given a new edge to those
sentiments of friendship with which I always have been, and ever shall
be,

Yours, MATT. BRAMBLE MANCHESTER, Sept. 15.




To Mrs GWILLIM, house-keeper at Brambleton-hall.

MRS GWYLLIM,

It has pleased Providence to bring us safe back to England, and partake
us in many pearls by land and water, in particular the Devil's Harse
a pike, and Hoyden's Hole, which hath got no bottom; and, as we are
drawing huomwards, it may be proper to uprise you, that Brambleton-hall
may be in condition to receive us, after this long gurney to the islands
of Scotland. By the first of next month you may begin to make constant
fires in my brother's chamber and mine; and burn a fagget every day in
the yellow damask room: have the tester and curtains dusted, and
the featherbed and matrosses well haired, because, perhaps, with the
blissing of haven, they may be yoosed on some occasion. Let the ould
hogsheads be well skewred and seasoned for bear, as Mat is resolved to
have his seller choak fool.

If the house was mine, I would turn over a new leaf--I don't see why
the sarvants of Wales shouldn't drink fair water, and eat hot cakes and
barley cale, as they do in Scotland, without troubling the botcher
above once a quarter--I hope you keep accunt of Roger's purseeding in
reverence to the buttermilk. I expect my dew when I come huom, without
baiting an ass, I'll assure you.--As you must have layed a great many
more eggs than would be eaten, I do suppose there is a power of turks,
chickings, and guzzling about the house; and a brave kergo of cheese
ready for market; and that the owl has been sent to Crickhowel, saving
what the maids spun in the family.

Pray let the whole house and furniture have a thorough cleaning from top
to bottom, for the honour of Wales; and let Roger search into, and make
a general clearance of the slit holes, which the maids have in secret;
for I know they are much given to sloth and uncleanness. I hope you have
worked a reformation among them, as I exhorted you in my last, and set
their hearts upon better things than they can find in junkitting and
caterwauling with the fellows of the country.

As for Win Jenkins, she has undergone a perfect metamurphysis, and is
become a new creeter from the ammunition of Humphry Clinker, our new
footman, a pious young man, who has laboured exceedingly, that she may
bring forth fruits of repentance. I make no doubt but he will take the
same pains with that pert hussey Mary Jones, and all of you; and that
he may have power given to penetrate and instill his goodness, even into
your most inward parts, is the fervent prayer of

Your friend in the spirit, TAB. BRAMBLE Septr. 18.




To Dr LEWIS.

DEAR LEWIS,

Lismahago is more paradoxical than ever.--The late gulp he had of his
native air, seems to have blown fresh spirit into all his polemical
faculties. I congratulated him the other day on the present flourishing
state of his country, observing that the Scots were now in a fair way
to wipe off the national reproach of poverty, and expressing my
satisfaction at the happy effects of the union, so conspicuous in
the improvement of their agriculture, commerce, manufactures, and
manners--The lieutenant, screwing up his features into a look of dissent
and disgust, commented on my remarks to this effect--'Those who reproach
a nation for its poverty, when it is not owing to the profligacy or vice
of the people, deserve no answer. The Lacedaemonians were poorer than
the Scots, when they took the lead among all the free states of Greece,
and were esteemed above them all for their valour and their virtue. The
most respectable heroes of ancient Rome, such as Fabricius, Cincinnatus,
and Regulus, were poorer than the poorest freeholder in Scotland; and
there are at this day individuals in North-Britain, one of whom can
produce more gold and silver than the whole republic of Rome could raise
at those times when her public virtue shone with unrivalled lustre; and
poverty was so far from being a reproach, that it added fresh laurels
to her fame, because it indicated a noble contempt of wealth, which was
proof against all the arts of corruption--If poverty be a subject
for reproach, it follows that wealth is the object of esteem and
veneration--In that case, there are Jews and others in Amsterdam and
London, enriched by usury, peculation, and different species of fraud
and extortion, who are more estimable than the most virtuous and
illustrious members of the community. An absurdity which no man in his
senses will offer to maintain.--Riches are certainly no proof of merit:
nay they are often (if not most commonly) acquired by persons of sordid
minds and mean talents: nor do they give any intrinsic worth to the
possessor; but, on the contrary, tend to pervert his understanding, and
render his morals more depraved. But, granting that poverty were really
matter of reproach, it cannot be justly imputed to Scotland. No country
is poor that can supply its inhabitants with the necessaries of life,
and even afford articles for exportation. Scotland is rich in natural
advantages: it produces every species of provision in abundance, vast
herds of cattle and flocks of sheep, with a great number of horses;
prodigious quantities of wool and flax, with plenty of copse wood, and
in some parts large forests of timber. The earth is still more rich
below than above the surface. It yields inexhaustible stores of coal,
free-stone, marble, lead, iron, copper, and silver, with some gold. The
sea abounds with excellent fish, and salt to cure them for exportation;
and there are creeks and harbours round the whole kingdom, for the
convenience and security of navigation. The face of the country displays
a surprising number of cities, towns, villas, and villages, swarming
with people; and there seems to be no want of art, industry, government,
and police: such a kingdom can never be called poor, in any sense of the
word, though there may be many others more powerful and opulent. But the
proper use of those advantages, and the present prosperity of the Scots,
you seem to derive from the union of the two kingdoms!'

I said, I supposed he would not deny that the appearance of the country
was much mended; that the people lived better, had more trade, and a
greater quantity of money circulating since the union, than before.
'I may safely admit these premises (answered the lieutenant), without
subscribing to your inference. The difference you mention, I should
take to be the natural progress of improvement--Since that period, other
nations, such as the Swedes, the Danes, and in particular the French,
have greatly increased in commerce, without any such cause assigned.
Before the union, there was a remarkable spirit of trade among the
Scots, as appeared in the case of their Darien company, in which they
had embarked no less than four hundred thousand pounds sterling; and in
the flourishing state of the maritime towns in Fife, and on the eastern
coast, enriched by their trade with France, which failed in consequence
of the union. The only solid commercial advantage reaped from that
measure, was the privilege of trading to the English plantations; yet,
excepting Glasgow and Dumfries, I don't know any other Scotch towns
concerned in that traffick. In other respects, I conceive the Scots were
losers by the union.--They lost the independency of their state, the
greatest prop of national spirit; they lost their parliament, and their
courts of justice were subjected to the revision and supremacy of an
English tribunal.'

'Softly, captain (cried I), you cannot be said to have lost your own
parliament, while you are represented in that of Great-Britain.' 'True
(said he, with a sarcastic grin), in debates of national competition,
the sixteen peers and forty-five commoners of Scotland, must make a
formidable figure in the scale, against the whole English legislature.'
'Be that as it may (I observed) while I had the honour to sit in the
lower house, the Scotch members had always the majority on their side.'
'I understand you, Sir (said he), they generally side with the majority;
so much the worse for their constituents. But even this evil is not the
worst they have sustained by the union. Their trade has been saddled
with grievous impositions, and every article of living severely taxed,
to pay the interest of enormous debts, contracted by the English, in
support of measures and connections in which the Scots had no interest
nor concern.' I begged he would at least allow, that by the union the
Scots were admitted to all the privileges and immunities of English
subjects; by which means multitudes of them were provided for in the
army and navy, and got fortunes in different parts of England, and its
dominions. 'All these (said he) become English subjects to all intents
and purposes, and are in a great measure lost to their mother-country.
The spirit of rambling and adventure has been always peculiar to the
natives of Scotland. If they had not met with encouragement in England,
they would have served and settled, as formerly, in other countries,
such as Muscovy, Sweden, Denmark, Poland, Germany, France, Piedmont, and
Italy, in all which nations their descendants continue to flourish even
at this day.'

By this time my patience began to fail and I exclaimed, 'For God's
sake, what has England got by this union which, you say, has been so
productive of misfortune to the Scots.' 'Great and manifold are the
advantages which England derives from the union (said Lismahago, in
a solemn tone). First and foremost, the settlement of the protestant
succession, a point which the English ministry drove with such
eagerness, that no stone was left unturned, to cajole and bribe a few
leading men, to cram the union down the throats of the Scottish nation,
who were surprisingly averse to the expedient. They gained by it a
considerable addition of territory, extending their dominion to the sea
on all sides of the island, thereby shutting up all back-doors against
the enterprizes of their enemies. They got an accession of above a
million of useful subjects, constituting a never-failing nursery of
seamen, soldiers, labourers, and mechanics; a most valuable acquisition
to a trading country, exposed to foreign wars, and obliged to maintain
a number of settlements in all the four quarters of the globe. In the
course of seven years, during the last war, Scotland furnished the
English army and navy with seventy thousand men, over and above those
who migrated to their colonies, or mingled with them at home in the
civil departments of life. This was a very considerable and seasonable
supply to a nation, whose people had been for many years decreasing in
number, and whose lands and manufactures were actually suffering for
want of hands. I need not remind you of the hackneyed maxim, that, to a
nation in such circumstances, a supply of industrious people is a
supply of wealth; nor repeat an observation, which is now received as
an eternal truth, even among the English themselves, that the Scots who
settle in South-Britain are remarkably sober, orderly, and industrious.'

I allowed the truth of this remark, adding, that by their industry,
oeconomy, and circumspection, many of them in England, as well as in her
colonies, amassed large fortunes, with which they returned to their own
country, and this was so much lost to South-Britain.--'Give me leave,
sir (said he), to assure you, that in your fact you are mistaken, and
in your deduction erroneous. Not one in two hundred that leave Scotland
ever returns to settle in his own country; and the few that do
return, carry thither nothing that can possibly diminish the stock of
South-Britain; for none of their treasure stagnates in Scotland--There
is a continual circulation, like that of the blood in the human body,
and England is the heart, to which all the streams which it distributes
are refunded and returned: nay, in consequence of that luxury which our
connexion with England hath greatly encouraged, if not introduced,
all the produce of our lands, and all the profits of our trade, are
engrossed by the natives of South-Britain; for you will find that the
exchange between the two kingdoms is always against Scotland; and
that she retains neither gold nor silver sufficient for her own
circulation.--The Scots, not content with their own manufactures and
produce, which would very well answer all necessary occasions, seem to
vie with each other in purchasing superfluities from England; such as
broad-cloth, velvets, stuffs, silks, lace, furs, jewels, furniture of
all sorts, sugar, rum, tea, chocolate and coffee; in a word, not only
every mode of the most extravagant luxury, but even many articles of
convenience, which they might find as good, and much cheaper in their
own country. For all these particulars, I conceive, England may touch
about one million sterling a-year.--I don't pretend to make an exact
calculation; perhaps, it may be something less, and perhaps, a great
deal more. The annual revenue arising from all the private estates of
Scotland cannot fall short of a million sterling; and, I should imagine,
their trade will amount to as much more.--I know the linen manufacture
alone returns near half a million, exclusive of the home-consumption
of that article.--If, therefore, North-Britain pays a ballance of a
million annually to England, I insist upon it, that country is
more valuable to her in the way of commerce, than any colony in her
possession, over and above the other advantages which I have specified:
therefore, they are no friends, either to England or to truth, who
affect to depreciate the northern part of the united kingdom.'

I must own, I was at first a little nettled to find myself schooled in
so many particulars.--Though I did not receive all his assertions
as gospel, I was not prepared to refute them; and I cannot help now
acquiescing in his remarks so far as to think, that the contempt for
Scotland, which prevails too much on this side the Tweed, is founded on
prejudice and error.--After some recollection, 'Well, captain (said I),
you have argued stoutly for the importance of your own country: for my
part, I have such a regard for our fellow-subjects of North-Britain,
that I shall be glad to see the day, when your peasants can afford to
give all their oats to their cattle, hogs, and poultry, and indulge
themselves with good wheaten loaves, instead of such poor, unpalatable,
and inflammatory diet.' Here again I brought my self into a premunire
with the disputative Caledonian. He said he hoped he should never see
the common people lifted out of that sphere for which they were intended
by nature and the course of things; that they might have some reason to
complain of their bread, if it were mixed, like that of Norway, with saw
dust and fish-bones; but that oatmeal was, he apprehended, as nourishing
and salutary as wheat-flour, and the Scots in general thought it at
least as savoury.--He affirmed, that a mouse, which, in the article of
self-preservation, might be supposed to act from infallible instinct,
would always prefer oats to wheat, as appeared from experience; for, in
a place where there was a parcel of each, that animal has never begun
to feed upon the latter till all the oats were consumed: for their
nutritive quality, he appealed to the hale, robust constitutions of
the people who lived chiefly upon oatmeal; and, instead of being
inflammatory, he asserted, that it was a cooling sub-acid, balsamic and
mucilaginous; insomuch, that in all inflammatory distempers, recourse
was had to water-gruel, and flummery made of oatmeal.

'At least (said I), give me leave to wish them such a degree of commerce
as may enable them to follow their own inclinations.'--'Heaven forbid!
(cried this philosopher). Woe be to that nation, where the multitude is
at liberty to follow their own inclinations! Commerce is undoubtedly
a blessing, while restrained within its proper channels; but a glut
of wealth brings along with it a glut of evils: it brings false taste,
false appetite, false wants, profusion, venality, contempt of order,
engendering a spirit of licentiousness, insolence, and faction, that
keeps the community in continual ferment, and in time destroys all the
distinctions of civil society; so that universal anarchy and uproar must
ensue. Will any sensible man affirm, that the national advantages of
opulence are to be sought on these terms?' 'No, sure; but I am one of
those who think, that, by proper regulations, commerce may produce every
national benefit, without the allay of such concomitant evils.'

So much for the dogmata of my friend Lismahago, whom I describe the
more circumstantially, as I firmly believe he will set up his rest in
Monmouthshire. Yesterday, while I was alone with him he asked, in some
confusion, if I should have any objection to the success of a gentleman
and a soldier, provided he should be so fortunate as to engage my
sister's affection. I answered without hesitation, that my sister was
old enough to judge for herself; and that I should be very far from
disapproving any resolution she might take in his favour.--His eyes
sparkled at this declaration. He declared, he should think himself the
happiest man on earth to be connected with my family; and that he should
never be weary of giving me proofs of his gratitude and attachment. I
suppose Tabby and he are already agreed; in which case, we shall have
a wedding at Brambleton-hall, and you shall give away the bride.--It is
the least thing you can do, by way of atonement for your former cruelty
to that poor love-sick maiden, who has been so long a thorn in the side
of


Yours, MATT. BRAMBLE Sept. 20.

We have been at Buxton; but, as I did not much relish either the company
or the accommodations, and had no occasion for the water, we stayed but
two nights in the place.




To Sir WATKIN PHILLIPS, Bart. of Jesus college, Oxon.

DEAR WAT,

Adventures begin to thicken as we advance to the southward. Lismahago
has now professed himself the admirer of our aunt, and carries on his
addresses under the sanction of her brother's approbation; so that we
shall certainly have a wedding by Christmas. I should be glad you was
present at the nuptials, to help me throw the stocking, and perform
other ceremonies peculiar to that occasion.--I am sure it will be
productive of some diversion; and, truly, it would be worth your while
to come across the country on purpose to see two such original figures
in bed together, with their laced night caps; he, the emblem of good
cheer, and she, the picture of good nature. All this agreeable prospect
was clouded, and had well nigh vanished entirely, in consequence of
a late misunderstanding between the future brothers-in-law, which,
however, is now happily removed.

A few days ago, my uncle and I, going to visit a relation, met with lord
Oxmington at his house, who asked us to dine with him, next day, and we
accepted the invitation.--Accordingly, leaving our women under the
care of captain Lismahago, at the inn where we had lodged the preceding
night, in a little town, about a mile from his lordship's dwelling, we
went at the hour appointed, and had a fashionable meal served up with
much ostentation to a company of about a dozen persons, none of whom
he had ever seen before.--His lordship is much more remarkable for his
pride and caprice, than for his hospitality and understanding; and,
indeed, it appeared, that he considered his guests merely as objects to
shine upon, so as to reflect the lustre of his own magnificence--There
was much state, but no courtesy; and a great deal of compliment without
any conversation.--Before the desert was removed, our noble entertainer
proposed three general toasts; then calling for a glass of wine, and
bowing all round, wished us a good afternoon. This was the signal for
the company to break up, and they obeyed it immediately, all except our
'squire who was greatly shocked at the manner of this dismission--He
changed countenance, bit his lip in silence, but still kept his seat,
so that his lordship found himself obliged to give us another hint, by
saying, he should be glad to see us another time. 'There is no time like
the present (cried Mr Bramble); your lordship has not yet drank a
bumper to the best in Christendom.' 'I'll drink no more bumpers to-day
(answered our landlord); and I am sorry to see you have drank too
many.--Order the gentleman's carriage to the gate.'--So saying, he rose
and retired abruptly; our 'squire starting up at the same time, laying
his hand upon his sword, and eyeing him with a most ferocious aspect.
The master having vanished in this manner, our uncle bad one of the
servants to see what was to pay; and the fellow answering, 'This is no
inn,' 'I cry you mercy (cried the other), I perceive it is not; if it
were, the landlord would be more civil. There's a guinea, however; take
it, and tell your lord, that I shall not leave the country till I
have had the opportunity to thank him in person for his politeness and
hospitality.'

We then walked down stairs through a double range of lacqueys, and
getting into the chaise, proceeded homewards. Perceiving the 'squire
much ruffled, I ventured to disapprove of his resentment, observing,
that as lord Oxmington was well known to have his brain very ill
timbered, a sensible man should rather laugh, than be angry at his
ridiculous want of breeding.--Mr Bramble took umbrage at my presuming to
be wiser than he upon this occasion; and told me, that as he had always
thought for himself in every occurrence in life, he would still use the
same privilege, with my good leave.

When we returned to our inn, he closeted Lismahago; and having explained
his grievance, desired that gentleman to go and demand satisfaction of
lord Oxmington in his name.--The lieutenant charged himself with this
commission, and immediately set out a horseback for his lordship's
house, attended, at his own request, by my man Archy Macalpine, who had
been used to military service; and truly, if Macalpine had been mounted
upon an ass, this couple might have passed for the knight of La Mancha
and his 'squire Panza. It was not till after some demur that Lismahago
obtained a private audience, at which he formally defied his lordship to
single combat, in the name of Mr Bramble, and desired him to appoint
the time and place. Lord Oxmington was so confounded at this unexpected
message, that he could not, for some time, make any articulate reply;
but stood staring at the lieutenant with manifest marks of perturbation.
At length, ringing a bell with great vehemence, he exclaimed, 'What!
a commoner send a challenge to a peer of the realm!--Privilege!
privilege!--Here's a person brings me a challenge from the Welshman that
dined at my table--An impudent fellow.--My wine is not yet out of his
head.'

The whole house was immediately in commotion.--Macalpine made a
soldierly retreat with two horses; but the captain was suddenly
surrounded and disarmed by the footmen, whom a French valet de chambre
headed in this exploit; his sword was passed through a close-stool, and
his person through the horse-pond. In this plight he returned to
the inn, half mad with his disgrace. So violent was the rage of his
indignation, that he mistook its object.--He wanted to quarrel with Mr
Bramble; he said, he had been dishonoured on his account, and he looked
for reparation at his hands.--My uncle's back was up in a moment; and he
desired him to explain his pretensions.--'Either compel lord Oxmington
to give me satisfaction (cried he), or give it me in your own person.'
'The latter part of the alternative is the most easy and expeditious
(replied the 'squire, starting up): if you are disposed for a walk, I'll
attend you this moment.'

Here they were interrupted by Mrs Tabby, who had overheard all that
passed.--She now burst into the room, and running betwixt them, in great
agitation, 'Is this your regard for me (said she to the lieutenant), to
seek the life of my brother?' Lismahago, who seemed to grow cool as my
uncle grew hot, assured her he had a very great respect for Mr Bramble,
but he had still more for his own honour, which had suffered pollution;
but if that could be once purified, he should have no further cause of
dissatisfaction. The 'squire said, he should have thought it incumbent
upon him to vindicate the lieutenant's honour; but, as he had now carved
for himself, he might swallow and digest it as well as he could--In a
word, what betwixt the mediation of Mrs Tabitha, the recollection of
the captain, who perceived he had gone too far, and the remonstrances
of your humble servant, who joined them at this juncture, those two
originals were perfectly reconciled; and then we proceeded to deliberate
upon the means of taking vengeance for the insults they had received
from the petulant peer; for, until that aim should be accomplished,
Mr Bramble swore, with great emphasis, that he would not leave the inn
where we now lodged, even if he should pass his Christmas on the spot.

In consequence of our deliberations, we next day, in the forenoon,
proceeded in a body to his lordship's house, all of us, with our
servants, including the coachman, mounted a-horseback, with our pistols
loaded and ready primed.--Thus prepared for action, we paraded solemnly
and slowly before his lordship's gate, which we passed three times in
such a manner, that he could not but see us, and suspect the cause
of our appearance.--After dinner we returned, and performed the same
cavalcade, which was again repeated the morning following; but we had no
occasion to persist in these manoeuvres. About noon, we were visited by
the gentleman, at whose house we had first seen lord Oxmington.--He now
came to make apologies in the name of his lordship, who declared he had
no intention to give offence to my uncle, in practising what had been
always the custom of his house; and that as for the indignities which
had been put upon the officer, they were offered without his Lordship's
knowledge, at the instigation of his valet de chambre.--'If that be the
case (said my uncle, in a peremptory tone), I shall be contented
with lord Oxmington's personal excuses; and I hope my friend will be
satisfied with his lordship's turning that insolent rascal out of his
service.'--'Sir (cried Lismahago), I must insist upon taking personal
vengeance for the personal injuries I have sustained.'

After some debate, the affair was adjusted in this manner.--His
lordship, meeting us at our friend's house, declared he was sorry for
what had happened; and that he had no intention to give umbrage.--The
valet de chambre asked pardon of the lieutenant upon his knees, when
Lismahago, to the astonishment of all present, gave him a violent kick
on the face, which laid him on his back, exclaiming in a furious tone,
'Oui je te pardonne, gens foutre.'

Such was the fortunate issue of this perilous adventure, which
threatened abundance of vexation to our family; for the 'squire is one
of those who will sacrifice both life and fortune, rather than leave
what they conceive to be the least speck or blemish upon their honour
and reputation. His lordship had no sooner pronounced his apology, with
a very bad grace, than he went away in some disorder, and, I dare say,
he will never invite another Welchman to his table.

We forthwith quitted the field of this atchievement, in order to
prosecute our journey; but we follow no determinate course. We make
small deviations, to see the remarkable towns, villas, and curiosities
on each side of our route; so that we advance by slow steps towards the
borders of Monmouthshire: but in the midst of these irregular motions,
there is no abberration nor eccentricity in that affection with which I
am, dear Wat,


Yours always, J. MELFORD Sept. 28.




To Dr LEWIS.

DEAR DICK,

At what time of life may a man think himself exempted from the necessity
of sacrificing his repose to the punctilios of a contemptible world? I
have been engaged in a ridiculous adventure, which I shall recount at
meeting; and this, I hope, will not be much longer delayed, as we have
now performed almost all our visits, and seen every thing that I think
has any right to retard us in our journey homewards--A few days ago,
understanding by accident, that my old friend Baynard was in the
country, I would not pass so near his habitation without paying him a
visit, though our correspondence had been interrupted for a long course
of years.

I felt my self very sensibly affected by the idea of our past intimacy,
as we approached the place where we had spent so many happy days
together; but when we arrived at the house, I could not recognize
any one of those objects, which had been so deeply impressed upon my
remembrance--The tall oaks that shaded the avenue, had been cut down,
and the iron gates at the end of it removed, together with the high wall
that surrounded the court yard. The house itself, which was formerly a
convent of Cistercian monks, had a venerable appearance: and along the
front that looked into the garden, was a stone gallery, which afforded
me many an agreeable walk, when I was disposed to be contemplative. Now
the old front is covered with a screen of modern architecture; so that
all without is Grecian, and all within Gothic. As for the garden, which
was well stocked with the best fruit which England could produce,
there is not now the least vestage remaining of trees, walls, or
hedges--Nothing appears but a naked circus of loose sand, with a dry
bason and a leaden triton in the middle.

You must know, that Baynard, at his father's death, had a clear estate
of fifteen hundred pounds a-year, and was in other respects extremely
well qualified to make a respectable figure in the commonwealth;
but, what with some excesses of youth, and the expence of a contested
election, he in a few years found himself encumbered with a debt of ten
thousand pounds, which he resolved to discharge by means of a prudent
marriage. He accordingly married a miss Thomson, whose fortune amounted
to double the sum that he owed--She was the daughter of a citizen, who
had failed in trade; but her fortune came by an uncle, who died in the
East-Indies--Her own parents being dead, she lived with a maiden aunt,
who had superintended her education; and, in all appearance, was well
enough qualified for the usual purposes of the married state--Her
virtues, however, stood rather upon a negative, than a positive
foundation--She was neither proud, insolent, nor capricious, nor given
to scandal, nor addicted to gaming, nor inclined to gallantry. She could
read, and write, and dance, and sing, and play upon the harpsichord,
and smatter French, and take a hand at whist and ombre; but even these
accomplishments she possessed by halves--She excelled in nothing.
Her conversation was flat, her stile mean, and her expression
embarrassed--In a word, her character was totally insipid. Her person
was not disagreeable; but there was nothing graceful in her address, nor
engaging in her manners; and she was so ill qualified to do the honours
of the house, that when she sat at the head of the table, one was always
looking for the mistress of the family in some other place.

Baynard had flattered himself, that it would be no difficult matter
to mould such a subject after his own fashion, and that she would
chearfully enter into his views, which were wholly turned to domestic
happiness. He proposed to reside always in the country, of which he was
fond to a degree of enthusiasm; to cultivate his estate, which was very
improvable; to enjoy the exercise of rural diversions; to maintain an
intimacy of correspondence with some friends that were settled in
his neighbourhood; to keep a comfortable house, without suffering his
expence to exceed the limits of his income; and to find pleasure and
employ merit for his wife in the management and avocations of her own
family--This, however, was a visionary scheme, which he never was able
to realize. His wife was as ignorant as a new-born babe of everything
that related to the conduct of a family; and she had no idea of a
country-life. Her understanding did not reach so far as to comprehend
the first principles of discretion; and, indeed, if her capacity had
been better than it was, her natural indolence would not have permitted
her to abandon a certain routine, to which she had been habituated. She
had not taste enough to relish any rational enjoyment; but her ruling
passion was vanity, not that species which arises from self-conceit
of superior accomplishments, but that which is of a bastard and idiot
nature, excited by shew and ostentation, which implies not even the
least consciousness of any personal merit.

The nuptial peal of noise and nonsense being rung out in all the usual
changes, Mr Baynard thought it high time to make her acquainted with
the particulars of the plan which he had projected--He told her that his
fortune, though sufficient to afford all the comforts of life, was not
ample enough to command all the superfluities of pomp and pageantry,
which, indeed, were equally absurd and intolerable--He therefore hoped
she would have no objection to their leaving London in the spring, when
he would take the opportunity to dismiss some unnecessary domestics,
whom he had hired for the occasion of their marriage--She heard him in
silence, and after some pause, 'So (said she) I am to be buried in the
country!' He was so confounded at this reply, that he could not speak
for some minutes: at length he told her, he was much mortified to find
he had proposed anything that was disagreeable to her ideas--'I am sure
(added he) I meant nothing more than to lay down a comfortable plan of
living within the bounds of our fortune, which is but moderate.' 'Sir
(said she), you are the best judge of your own affairs--My fortune,
I know, does not exceed twenty thousand pounds--Yet, even with that
pittance, I might have had a husband who would not have begrudged me a
house in London'--'Good God! my dear (cried poor Baynard, in the
utmost agitation), you don't think me so sordid--I only hinted what I
thought--But, I don't pretend to impose--' 'Yes, sir (resumed the lady),
it is your prerogative to command, and my duty to obey' So saying, she
burst into tears and retired to her chamber, where she was joined by her
aunt--He endeavoured to recollect himself, and act with vigour of mind
on this occasion; but was betrayed by the tenderness of his nature,
which was the greatest defect of his constitution. He found the aunt
in tears, and the niece in a fit, which held her the best part of eight
hours, at the expiration of which, she began to talk incoherently about
death and her dear husband, who had sat by her all this time, and now
pressed her hand to his lips, in a transport of grief and penitence
for the offence he had given--From thence forward, he carefully avoided
mentioning the country; and they continued to be sucked deeper and
deeper into the vortex of extravagance and dissipation, leading what
is called a fashionable life in town--About the latter end of July,
however, Mrs Baynard, in order to exhibit a proof of conjugal obedience,
desired of her own accord, that they might pay a visit to his country
house, as there was no company left in London. He would have excused
himself from this excursion which was no part of the oeconomical plan he
had proposed; but she insisted upon making this sacrifice to his taste
and prejudices, and away they went with such an equipage as astonished
the whole country. All that remained of the season was engrossed by
receiving and returning visits in the neighbourhood; and, in
this intercourse it was discovered that sir John Chickwell had a
house-steward and one footman in livery more than the complement of
Mr Baynard's household. This remark was made by the aunt at table, and
assented to by the husband, who observed that sir John Chickwell might
very well afford to keep more servants than were found in the family
of a man who had not half his fortune. Mrs Baynard ate no supper that
evening; but was seized with a violent fit, which completed her triumph
over the spirit of her consort. The two supernumerary servants were
added--The family plate was sold for old silver, and a new service
procured; fashionable furniture was provided, and the whole house turned
topsy turvy.

At their return to London in the beginning of winter, he, with a heavy
heart, communicated these particulars to me in confidence. Before his
marriage, he had introduced me to the lady as his particular friend;
and I now offered in that character, to lay before her the necessity of
reforming her oeconomy, if she had any regard to the interest of her own
family, or complaisance for the inclinations of her husband--But Baynard
declined my offer, on the supposition that his wife's nerves were
too delicate to bear expostulation; and that it would only serve to
overwhelm her with such distress as would make himself miserable.

Baynard is a man of spirit, and had she proved a termagant, he would
have known how to deal with her; but, either by accident or instinct,
she fastened upon the weak side of his soul, and held it so fast, that
he has been in subjection ever since--I afterwards advised him to carry
her abroad to France or Italy, where he might gratify her vanity for
half the expence it cost him in England: and this advice he followed
accordingly. She was agreeably flattered with the idea of seeing and
knowing foreign parts, and foreign fashions; of being presented to
sovereigns, and living familiarly with princes. She forthwith seized the
hint which I had thrown out on purpose, and even pressed Mr Baynard to
hasten his departure; so that in a few weeks they crossed the sea to
France, with a moderate train, still including the aunt; who was
her bosom counsellor, and abetted her in all her oppositions to her
husband's will--Since that period, I have had little or no opportunity
to renew our former correspondence--All that I knew of his transactions,
amounted to no more than that after an absence of two years, they
returned so little improved in oeconomy, that they launched out into
new oceans of extravagance, which at length obliged him to mortgage his
estate--By this time she had bore him three children, of which the last
only survives, a puny boy of twelve or thirteen, who will be ruined in
his education by the indulgence of his mother.

As for Baynard, neither his own good sense, nor the dread of indigence,
nor the consideration of his children, has been of force sufficient to
stimulate him into the resolution of breaking at once the shameful spell
by which he seems enchanted--With a taste capable of the most refined
enjoyment, a heart glowing with all the warmth of friendship and
humanity, and a disposition strongly turned to the more rational
pleasures of a retired and country life, he is hurried about in a
perpetual tumult, amidst a mob of beings pleased with rattles, baubles,
and gewgaws, so void of sense and distinction, that even the most acute
philosopher would find it a very hard task to discover for what wise
purpose of providence they were created--Friendship is not to be found;
nor can the amusements for which he sighs be enjoyed within the rotation
of absurdity, to which he is doomed for life. He has long resigned
all views of improving his fortune by management and attention to
the exercise of husbandry, in which he delighted; and as to domestic
happiness, not the least glimpse of hope remains to amuse his
imagination. Thus blasted in all his prospects, he could not fail to
be overwhelmed with melancholy and chagrin, which have preyed upon his
health and spirits in such a manner, that he is now threatened with a
consumption.

I have given you a sketch of the man, whom the other day I went to
visit--At the gate we found a great number of powdered lacquies, but
no civility--After we had sat a considerable time in the coach, we were
told, that Mr Baynard had rode out, and that his lady was dressing; but
we were introduced to a parlour, so very fine and delicate, that in all
appearance it was designed to be seen only, not inhabited. The chairs
and couches were carved, gilt, and covered with rich damask, so smooth
and slick, that they looked as if they had never been sat upon. There
was no carpet upon the floor, but the boards were rubbed and waxed in
such a manner, that we could not walk, but were obliged to slide
along them; and as for the stove, it was too bright and polished to be
polluted with sea-coal, or stained by the smoke of any gross material
fire--When we had remained above half an hour sacrificing to the
inhospitable powers in the temple of cold reception, my friend Baynard
arrived, and understanding we were in the house, made his appearance, so
meagre, yellow, and dejected, that I really should not have known him,
had I met with him in any other place. Running up to me, with great
eagerness, he strained me in his embrace, and his heart was so full,
that for some minutes he could not speak. Having saluted us all round,
he perceived our uncomfortable situation, and conducting us into another
apartment, which had fire in the chimney, called for chocolate--Then,
withdrawing, he returned with a compliment from his wife, and, in the
mean time, presented his son Harry, a shambling, blear-eyed boy, in the
habit of a hussar; very rude, forward, and impertinent. His father would
have sent him to a boarding-school, but his mamma and aunt would not
hear of his lying out of the house; so that there was a clergyman
engaged as his tutor in the family.

As it was but just turned of twelve, and the whole house was in
commotion to prepare a formal entertainment, I foresaw it would be
late before we dined, and proposed a walk to Mr Baynard, that we might
converse together freely. In the course of this perambulation, when I
expressed some surprize that he had returned so soon from Italy, he
gave me to understand, that his going abroad had not at all answered the
purpose, for which he left England; that although the expence of living
was not so great in Italy as at home, respect being had to the same rank
of life in both countries, it had been found necessary for him to lift
himself above his usual stile, that he might be on some footing with
the counts, marquises, and cavaliers, with whom he kept company--He was
obliged to hire a great number of servants, to take off a great variety
of rich cloaths, and to keep a sumptuous table for the fashionable
scorocconi of the country; who, without a consideration of this kind,
would not have payed any attention to an untitled foreigner, let his
family or fortune be ever so respectable--Besides, Mrs Baynard was
continually surrounded by a train of expensive loungers, under the
denominations of language-masters, musicians, painters, and ciceroni;
and had actually fallen into the disease of buying pictures and antiques
upon her own judgment, which was far from being infallible--At length
she met with an affront, which gave her disgust to Italy, and drove her
back to England with some precipitation. By means of frequenting the
dutchess of B[edford]'s conversazione, while her grace was at Rome, Mrs
Baynard became acquainted with all the fashionable people of that city,
and was admitted to their assemblies without scruple--Thus favoured, she
conceived too great an idea of her own importance, and when the dutchess
left Rome, resolved to have a conversazione that should leave the
Romans no room to regret her grace's departure. She provided hands for a
musical entertainment, and sent biglietti of invitation to every person
of distinction; but not one Roman of the female sex appeared at her
assembly--She was that night seized with a violent fit, and kept her
bed three days, at the expiration of which she declared that the air of
Italy would be the ruin of her constitution. In order to prevent this
catastrophe, she was speedily removed to Geneva, from whence they
returned to England by the way of Lyons and Paris. By the time they
arrived at Calais, she had purchased such a quantity of silks, stuffs,
and laces, that it was necessary to hire a vessel to smuggle them over,
and this vessel was taken by a custom-house cutter; so that they lost
the whole cargo, which had cost them above eight hundred pounds.

It now appears, that her travels had produced no effect upon her, but
that of making her more expensive and fantastic than ever: She affected
to lead the fashion, not only in point of female dress, but in every
article of taste and connoisseurship. She made a drawing of the new
facade to the house in the country; she pulled up the trees, and pulled
down the walls of the garden, so as to let in the easterly wind, which
Mr Baynard's ancestors had been at great pains to exclude. To shew her
taste in laying out ground, she seized into her own hand a farm of two
hundred acres, about a mile from the house, which she parcelled out into
walks and shrubberies, having a great bason in the middle, into which
she poured a whole stream that turned two mills, and afforded the best
trout in the country. The bottom of the bason, however, was so ill
secured, that it would not hold the water which strained through the
earth, and made a bog of the whole plantation: in a word, the ground
which formerly payed him one hundred and fifty pounds a year, now cost
him two hundred pounds a year to keep it in tolerable order, over and
above the first expence of trees, shrubs, flowers, turf, and gravel.
There was not an inch of garden ground left about the house, nor a tree
that produced fruit of any kind; nor did he raise a truss of hay, or a
bushel of oats for his horses, nor had he a single cow to afford milk
for his tea; far less did he ever dream of feeding his own mutton,
pigs, and poultry: every article of housekeeping, even the most
inconsiderable, was brought from the next market town, at the distance
of five miles, and thither they sent a courier every morning to fetch
hot rolls for breakfast. In short, Baynard fairly owned that he spent
double his income, and that in a few years he should be obliged to sell
his estate for the payment of his creditors. He said that his wife had
such delicate nerves, and such imbecility of spirit, that she could
neither bear remonstrance, be it ever so gentle, nor practise any scheme
of retrenchment, even if she perceived the necessity of such a measure.
He had therefore ceased struggling against the stream, and endeavoured
to reconcile himself to ruin, by reflecting that his child at least
would inherit his mother's fortune, which was secured to him by the
contract of marriage.

The detail which he gave me of his affairs, filled me at once with grief
and indignation. I inveighed bitterly against the indiscretion of his
wife, and reproached him with his unmanly acquiescence under the absurd
tyranny which she exerted. I exhorted him to recollect his resolution,
and make one effectual effort to disengage himself from a thraldom,
equally shameful and pernicious. I offered him all the assistance in my
power. I undertook to regulate his affairs, and even to bring about a
reformation in his family, if he would only authorise me to execute the
plan I should form for his advantage. I was so affected by the subject,
that I could not help mingling tears with my remonstrances, and Baynard
was so penetrated with these marks of my affection, that he lost all
power of utterance. He pressed me to his breast with great emotion, and
wept in silence. At length he exclaimed, 'Friendship is undoubtedly the
most precious balm of life! Your words, dear Bramble, have in a great
measure recalled me from an abyss of despondence, in which I have
been long overwhelmed. I will, upon honour, make you acquainted with
a distinct state of my affairs, and, as far as I am able to go, will
follow the course you prescribe. But there are certain lengths which my
nature--The truth is, there are tender connexions, of which a batchelor
has no idea--Shall I own my weakness? I cannot bear the thoughts of
making that woman uneasy'--'And yet (cried I), she has seen you unhappy
for a series of years--unhappy from her misconduct, without ever shewing
the least inclination to alleviate your distress'--'Nevertheless (said
he) I am persuaded she loves me with the most warm affection; but these
are incongruities in the composition of the human mind which I hold to
be inexplicable.'

I was shocked at his infatuation, and changed the subject, after we had
agreed to maintain a close correspondence for the future. He then gave
me to understand, that he had two neighbours, who, like himself, were
driven by their wives at full speed, in the high road to bankruptcy and
ruin. All the three husbands were of dispositions very different from
each other, and, according to this variation, their consorts were
admirably suited to the purpose of keeping them all three in subjection.
The views of the ladies were exactly the same. They vied in grandeur,
that is, in ostentation, with the wife of Sir Charles Chickwell, who had
four times their fortune; and she again piqued herself upon making an
equal figure with a neighbouring peeress, whose revenue trebled her
own. Here then was the fable of the frog and the ox, realized in four
different instances within the same county: one large fortune, and
three moderate estates, in a fair way of being burst by the inflation of
female vanity; and in three of these instances, three different forms of
female tyranny were exercised. Mr Baynard was subjugated by practising
upon the tenderness of his nature. Mr Milksan, being of a timorous
disposition, truckled to the insolence of a termagant. Mr Sowerby, who
was of a temper neither to be moved by fits, nor driven by menaces,
had the fortune to be fitted with a helpmate, who assailed him with
the weapons of irony and satire; sometimes sneering in the way of
compliment; sometimes throwing out sarcastic comparisons, implying
reproaches upon his want of taste, spirit, and generosity: by which
means she stimulated his passions from one act of extravagance to
another, just as the circumstances of her vanity required.

All these three ladies have at this time the same number of horses,
carriages, and servants in and out of livery; the same variety of dress;
the same quantity of plate and china; the like ornaments in furniture:
and in their entertainments they endeavour to exceed one another in the
variety, delicacy, and expence of their dishes. I believe it will be
found upon enquiry, that nineteen out of twenty, who are ruined by
extravagance, fall a sacrifice to the ridiculous pride and vanity of
silly women, whose parts are held in contempt by the very men whom they
pillage and enslave. Thank heaven, Dick, that among all the follies
and weaknesses of human nature, I have not yet fallen into that of
matrimony.

After Baynard and I had discussed all these matters at leisure, we
returned towards the house, and met Jery with our two women, who had
come forth to take the air, as the lady of the mansion had not yet made
her appearance. In short, Mrs Baynard did not produce herself, till
about a quarter of an hour before dinner was upon the table. Then her
husband brought her into the parlour, accompanied by her aunt and son,
and she received us with a coldness of reserve sufficient to freeze the
very soul of hospitality. Though she knew I had been the intimate friend
of her husband, and had often seen me with him in London, she shewed no
marks of recognition or regard, when I addressed myself to her in the
most friendly terms of salutation. She did not even express the common
compliment of, I am glad to see you; or, I hope you have enjoyed your
health since we had the pleasure of seeing you; or some such words of
course: nor did she once open her mouth in the way of welcome to my
sister and my niece: but sat in silence like a statue, with an aspect of
insensibility. Her aunt, the model upon which she had been formed, was
indeed the very essence of insipid formality but the boy was very pert
and impudent, and prated without ceasing.

At dinner, the lady maintained the same ungracious indifference, never
speaking but in whispers to her aunt; and as to the repast, it was made
up of a parcel of kickshaws, contrived by a French cook, without one
substantial article adapted to the satisfaction of an English appetite.
The pottage was little better than bread soaked in dishwashings,
lukewarm. The ragouts looked as if they had been once eaten and half
digested: the fricassees were involved in a nasty yellow poultice: and
the rotis were scorched and stinking, for the honour of the fumet. The
desert consisted of faded fruit and iced froth, a good emblem of our
landlady's character; the table-beer was sour, the water foul, and the
wine vapid; but there was a parade of plate and china, and a powdered
lacquey stood behind every chair, except those of the master and
mistress of the house, who were served by two valets dressed like
gentlemen. We dined in a large old Gothic parlour, which was formerly
the hall. It was now paved with marble, and, notwithstanding the fire
which had been kindled about an hour, struck me with such a chill
sensation, that when I entered it the teeth chattered in my jaws--In
short, every thing was cold, comfortless, and disgusting, except the
looks of my friend Baynard, which declared the warmth of his affection
and humanity.

After dinner we withdrew into another apartment, where the boy began to
be impertinently troublesome to my niece Liddy. He wanted a playfellow,
forsooth; and would have romped with her, had she encouraged his
advances--He was even so impudent as to snatch a kiss, at which she
changed countenance, and seemed uneasy; and though his father checked
him for the rudeness of his behaviour, he became so outrageous as to
thrust his hand in her bosom: an insult to which she did not tamely
submit, though one of the mildest creatures upon earth. Her eyes
sparkling with resentment, she started up, and lent him such a box in
the ear, as sent him staggering to the other side of the room.

'Miss Melford (cried his father), you have treated him with the utmost
propriety--I am only sorry that the impertinence of any child of mine
should have occasioned this exertion of your spirit, which I cannot but
applaud and admire.' His wife was so far from assenting to the candour
of his apology, that she rose from the table, and, taking her son by the
hand, 'Come, child (said she), your father cannot abide you.' So
saying, she retired with this hopeful youth, and was followed by her
gouvernante: but neither the one nor the other deigned to take the least
notice of the company.

Baynard was exceedingly disconcerted; but I perceived his uneasiness was
tinctured with resentment, and derived a good omen from this discovery.
I ordered the horses to be put to the carriage, and, though he made
some efforts to detain us all night, I insisted upon leaving the house
immediately; but, before I went away, I took an opportunity of speaking
to him again in private. I said every thing I could recollect, to
animate his endeavours in shaking off those shameful trammels. I made
no scruple to declare, that his wife was unworthy of that tender
complaisance which he had shewn for her foibles: that she was dead to
all the genuine sentiments of conjugal affection; insensible of her
own honour and interest, and seemingly destitute of common sense and
reflection. I conjured him to remember what he owed to his father's
house, to his own reputation, and to his family, including even this
unreasonable woman herself, who was driving on blindly to her own
destruction. I advised him to form a plan for retrenching superfluous
expence, and try to convince the aunt of the necessity for such
a reformation, that she might gradually prepare her niece for its
execution; and I exhorted him to turn that disagreeable piece of
formality out of the house, if he should find her averse to his
proposal.

Here he interrupted me with a sigh, observing that such a step would
undoubtedly be fatal to Mrs Baynard--'I shall lose all patience (cried
I), to hear you talk so weakly--Mrs Baynard's fits will never hurt her
constitution. I believe in my conscience they are all affected: I am
sure she has no feeling for your distresses; and, when you are ruined,
she will appear to have no feeling for her own.' Finally, I took his
word and honour that he would make an effort, such as I had advised;
that he would form a plan of oeconomy, and, if he found it impracticable
without my assistance, he would come to Bath in the winter, where I
promised to give him the meeting, and contribute all in my power to the
retrieval of his affairs--With this mutual engagement we parted; and I
shall think myself supremely happy, if, by my means, a worthy man, whom
I love and esteem, can be saved from misery, disgrace, and despair.

I have only one friend more to visit in this part of the country, but he
is of a complexion very different from that of Baynard. You have heard
me mention Sir Thomas Bullford, whom I knew in Italy. He is now become
a country gentleman; but, being disabled by the gout from enjoying any
amusement abroad, he entertains himself within doors, by keeping open
house for all corners, and playing upon the oddities and humours of his
company: but he himself is generally the greatest original at his table.
He is very good-humoured, talks much, and laughs without ceasing. I am
told that all the use he makes of his understanding at present, is to
excite mirth, by exhibiting his guests in ludicrous attitudes. I know
not how far we may furnish him with entertainment of this kind, but I am
resolved to beat up his quarters, partly with a view to laugh with
the knight himself, and partly to pay my respects to his lady, a
good-natured sensible woman, with whom he lives upon very easy terms,
although she has not had the good fortune to bring him an heir to his
estate.

And now, dear Dick, I must tell you for your comfort, that you are the
only man upon earth to whom I would presume to send such a longwinded
epistle, which I could not find in my heart to curtail, because the
subject interested the warmest passions of my heart; neither will I make
any other apology to a correspondent who has been so long accustomed to
the impertinence of

MATT. BRAMBLE Sept. 30.




To Sir WATKIN PHILLIPS, Bart. at Oxon.

DEAR KNIGHT,

I believe there is something mischievous in my disposition, for nothing
diverts me so much as to see certain characters tormented with false
terrors.--We last night lodged at the house of Sir Thomas Bullford, an
old friend of my uncle, a jolly fellow, of moderate intellects, who, in
spite of the gout, which hath lamed him, is resolved to be merry to the
last; and mirth he has a particular knack in extracting from his guests,
let their humour be ever so caustic or refractory.--Besides our company,
there was in the house a fat-headed justice of the peace, called
Frogmore, and a country practitioner in surgery, who seemed to be our
landlord's chief companion and confidant.--We found the knight sitting
on a couch, with his crutches by his side, and his feet supported on
cushions; but he received us with a hearty welcome, and seemed greatly
rejoiced at our arrival.--After tea, we were entertained with a sonata
on the harpsichord by lady Bullford, who sung and played to admiration;
but Sir Thomas seemed to be a little asinine in the article of ears,
though he affected to be in raptures, and begged his wife to favour us
with an arietta of her own composing.--This arietta, however, she no
sooner began to perform, than he and the justice fell asleep; but the
moment she ceased playing, the knight waked snorting, and exclaimed,
'O cara! what d'ye think, gentlemen? Will you talk any more of your
Pargolesi and your Corelli?'--At the same time, he thrust his tongue in
one cheek, and leered with one eye at the doctor and me, who sat on his
left hand. He concluded the pantomime with a loud laugh, which he could
command at all times extempore.--Notwithstanding his disorder, he did
not do penance at supper, nor did he ever refuse his glass when the
toast went round, but rather encouraged a quick circulation, both by
precept and example.

I soon perceived the doctor had made himself very necessary to the
baronet.--He was the whetstone of his wit, the butt of his satire, and
his operator in certain experiments of humour, which were occasionally
tried upon strangers.--Justice Frogmore was an excellent subject for
this species of philosophy; sleek and corpulent, solemn, and shallow,
he had studied Burn with uncommon application, but he studied nothing
so much as the art of living (that is, eating) well--This fat buck had
often afforded good sport to our landlord; and he was frequently started
with tolerable success, in the course of this evening; but the baronet's
appetite for ridicule seemed to be chiefly excited by the appearance,
address, and conversation of Lismahago, whom he attempted in all
different modes of exposition; but he put me in mind of a contest that I
once saw betwixt a young hound and an old hedge-hog--The dog turned him
over and over, and bounced and barked, and mumbled; but as often as
he attempted to bite, he felt a prickle in his jaws, and recoiled in
manifest confusion;--The captain, when left to himself, will not fail to
turn his ludicrous side to the company, but if any man attempts to force
him into that attitude, he becomes stubborn as a mule, and unmanageable
as an elephant unbroke.

Divers tolerable jokes were cracked upon the justice, who eat a most
unconscionable supper, and, among other things, a large plate of broiled
mushrooms, which he had no sooner swallowed than the doctor observed,
with great gravity, that they were of the kind called champignons, which
in some constitutions has a poisonous effect.--Mr Frogmore startled at
this remark, asked, in some confusion, why he had not been so kind as to
give him that notice sooner.--He answered, that he took it for granted,
by his eating them so heartily, that he was used to the dish; but as he
seemed to be under some apprehension, he prescribed a bumper of plague
water, which the justice drank off immediately, and retired to rest, not
without marks of terror and disquiet.

At midnight we were shewn to our different chambers, and in half an
hour, I was fast asleep in bed; but about three o'clock in the morning I
was waked with a dismal cry of Fire! and starting up, ran to the window
in my shirt.--The night was dark and stormy; and a number of people
half-dressed ran backwards and forwards thro' the court-yard, with links
and lanthorns, seemingly in the utmost hurry and trepidation.--Slipping
on my cloaths in a twinkling, I ran down stairs, and, upon enquiry,
found the fire was confined to a back-stair, which led to a detached
apartment where Lismahago lay.--By this time, the lieutenant was alarmed
by bawling at his window, which was in the second story, but he could
not find his cloaths in the dark, and his room-door was locked on the
outside.--The servants called to him, that the house had been robbed;
that, without all doubt, the villains had taken away his cloaths,
fastened the door, and set the house on fire, for the stair-case was in
flames.--In this dilemma the poor lieutenant ran about the room naked
like a squirrel in a cage, popping out his bead at the window between
whiles, and imploring assistance.--At length, the knight in person
was brought out in his chair, attended by my uncle and all the family,
including our aunt Tabitha, who screamed, and cried, and tore her hair,
as if she had been distracted--Sir Thomas had already ordered his people
to bring a long ladder which was applied to the captain's, window, and
now he exhorted him earnestly to descend.--There was no need of much
rhetoric to persuade Lismahago, who forthwith made his exit by the
window, roaring all the time to the people below to hold fast the
ladder.

Notwithstanding the gravity of the occasion, it was impossible to behold
this scene without being seized with an inclination to laugh. The rueful
aspect of the lieutenant in his shirt, with a quilted night-cap fastened
under his chin, and his long lank limbs and posteriors exposed to the
wind, made a very picturesque appearance, when illumined by the links
and torches which the servants held up to light him in his descent.--All
the company stood round the ladder, except the knight, who sat in his
chair, exclaiming from time to time, 'Lord, have mercy upon us!--save
the gentleman's life!--mind your footing, dear captain! softly!--stand
fast!--clasp the ladder with both hands!--there!--well done, my dear
boy!--O bravo!--an old soldier for ever!--bring a blanket bring a
warm blanket to comfort his poor carcase--warm the bed in the green
room--give me your hand, dear captain--I'm rejoiced to see thee safe
and sound with all my heart.' Lismahago was received at the foot of the
ladder by his inamorata, who snatching a blanket from one of the maids,
wrapped it about his body; two men-servants took him under the arms,
and a female conducted him to the green room, still accompanied by Mrs
Tabitha, who saw him fairly put to bed.--During this whole transaction
he spoke not a syllable, but looked exceeding grim, sometimes at one,
sometimes at another of the spectators, who now adjourned in a body to
the parlour where we had supped, every one surveying another with marks
of astonishment and curiosity.

The knight being seated in an easy chair, seized my uncle by the hand,
and bursting into a long and loud laugh, 'Matt (cried he), crown me with
oak, or ivy, or laurel, or parsely, or what you will, and acknowledge
this to be a coup de maitre in the way of waggery--ha, ha, ha!--Such a
camisciata, scagliata, beffata! O, che roba! O, what a subject!--O, what
caricatura!--O, for a Rosa, a Rembrandt, a Schalken!--Zooks, I'll give a
hundred guineas to have it painted!--what a fine descent from the cross,
or ascent to the gallows! what lights and shadows!--what a groupe below!
what expression above!--what an aspect!--did you mind the aspect? ha,
ha, ha!--and the limbs, and the muscles every toe denoted terror! ha,
ha, ha!--then the blanket! O, what costume! St Andrew! St Lazarus! St
Barrabas!--ha, ha, ha!' 'After all then (cried Mr Bramble very gravely),
this was no more than a false alarm.--We have been frightened out of our
beds, and almost out of our senses, for the joke's sake.' 'Ay, and such
a joke! (cried our landlord) such a farce! such a denouement! such a
catastrophe!'

'Have a little patience (replied our 'squire); we are not yet come to
the catastrophe; and pray God it may not turn out a tragedy instead of a
farce.--The captain is one of those saturnine subjects, who have no
idea of humour.--He never laughs in his own person; nor can he bear that
other people should laugh at his expence. Besides, if the subject
had been properly chosen, the joke was too severe in all conscience.'
''Sdeath! (cried the knight) I could not have bated him an ace had
he been my own father; and as for the subject, such another does not
present itself once in half a century.' Here Mrs Tabitha interposing,
and bridling up, declared, she did not see that Mr Lismahago was a
fitter subject for ridicule than the knight himself; and that she was
very much afraid, he would very soon find he had mistaken his man.--The
baronet was a good deal disconcerted by his intimation, saying, that he
must be a Goth and a barbarian, if he did not enter into the spirit of
such a happy and humourous contrivance.--He begged, however, that Mr
Bramble and his sister would bring him to reason; and this request was
reinforced by lady Bullford, who did not fail to read the baronet a
lecture upon his indiscretion, which lecture he received with submission
on one side of his face, and a leer upon the other.

We now went to bed for the second time; and before I got up, my uncle
had visited Lismahago in the green room, and used such arguments with
him, that when we met in the parlour he seemed to be quite appeased.
He received the knight's apology with good grace, and even professed
himself pleased at finding he had contributed to the diversion of the
company.--Sir Thomas shook him by the hand, laughing heartily; and
then desired a pinch of snuff, in token of perfect reconciliation--The
lieutenant, putting his hand in his waistcoat pocket, pulled out,
instead of his own Scotch mull, a very fine gold snuff-box, which he no
sooner perceived than he said, 'Here is a small mistake.' 'No mistake
at all (cried the baronet): a fair exchange is no robbery.--Oblige me so
far, captain, as to let me keep your mull as a memorial.' 'Sir (said the
lieutenant), the mull is much at your service; but this machine I can by
no means retain.--It looks like compounding a sort of felony in the code
of honour. Besides, I don't know but there may be another joke in this
conveyance; and I don't find myself disposed to be brought upon the
stage again.--I won't presume to make free with your pockets, but I beg
you will put it up again with your own hand.' So saying, with a certain
austerity of aspect, he presented the snuffbox to the knight, who
received it in some confusion, and restored the mull, which he would by
no means keep except on the terms of exchange.

This transaction was like to give a grave cast to the conversation,
when my uncle took notice that Mr Justice Frogmore had not made his
appearance either at the night-alarm, or now at the general rendezvous.
The baronet hearing Frogmore mentioned, 'Odso! (cried he) I had forgot
the justice.--Pr'ythee, doctor, go and bring him out of his kennel.'
Then laughing till his sides were well shaken, he said he would shew the
captain, that he was not the only person of the drama exhibited for the
entertainment of the company. As to the night-scene, it could not affect
the justice, who had been purposely lodged in the farther end of the
house, remote from the noise, and lulled with a dose of opium into the
bargain. In a few minutes, Mr Justice was led into the parlour in his
nightcap and loose morning-gown, rolling his head from side to side, and
groaning piteously all the way.--'Jesu! neighbour Frogmore (exclaimed
the baronet), what is the matter?--you look as if you was not a man
for this world.--Set him down softly on the couch--poor gentlemen!--Lord
have mercy upon us!--What makes him so pale, and yellow, and bloated?'
'Oh, Sir Thomas! (cried the justice) I doubt 'tis all over with me--
Those mushrooms I eat at your table have done my business--ah! oh!
hey!' 'Now the Lord forbid! (said the other)--what! man, have a good
heart--How does thy stomach feel?--hall?'

To this interrogation he made no reply; but throwing aside his
nightgown, discovered that his waist-coat would not meet upon his belly
by five good inches at least. 'Heaven protect us all! (cried Sir Thomas)
what a melancholy spectacle!--never did I see a man so suddenly swelled,
but when he was either just dead, or just dying.--Doctor, can'st thou
do nothing for this poor object?' 'I don't think the case is quite
desperate (said the surgeon), but I would advise Mr Frogmore to settle
his affairs with all expedition; the parson may come and pray by him,
while I prepare a glyster and an emetic draught.' The justice, rolling
his languid eyes, ejaculated with great fervency, 'Lord, have mercy upon
us! Christ, have mercy upon us!'--Then he begged the surgeon, in the
name of God, to dispatch--'As for my worldly affairs (said he), they
are all settled but one mortgage, which must be left to my heirs--but
my poor soul! my poor soul! what will become of my poor soul? miserable
sinner that I am!' 'Nay, pr'ythee, my dear boy, compose thyself (resumed
the knight); consider the mercy of heaven is infinite; thou can'st
not have any sins of a very deep dye on thy conscience, or the devil's
in't.' 'Name not the devil (exclaimed the terrified Frogmore), I have
more sins to answer for than the world dreams of.--Ah! friend, I have
been sly--sly damn'd sly!--Send for the parson without loss of time, and
put me to bed, for I am posting to eternity.'--He was accordingly raised
from the couch, and supported by two servants, who led him back to his
room; but before he quitted the parlour, he intreated the good company
to assist him with their prayers.--He added, 'Take warning by me, who
am suddenly cut off in my prime, like a flower of the field; and God
forgive you, Sir Thomas, for suffering such poisonous trash to be eaten
at your table.'

He was no sooner removed out of hearing, than the baronet abandoned
himself to a violent fit of laughing, in which he was joined by the
greatest part of the company; but we could hardly prevent the good lady
from going to undeceive the patient, by discovering, that while he slept
his waistcoat had been straitened by the contrivance of the surgeon;
and that the disorder in his stomach and bowels was occasioned by some
antimonial wine, which he had taken over night, under the denomination
of plague-water. She seemed to think that his apprehension might put an
end to his life: the knight swore he was no such chicken, but a
tough old rogue, that would live long enough to plague all his
neighbours.--Upon enquiry, we found his character did not intitle him to
much compassion or respect, and therefore we let our landlord's humour
take its course.--A glyster was actually administered by an old woman
of the family, who had been Sir Thomas's nurse, and the patient took
a draught made with oxymel of squills to forward the operation of the
antimonial wine, which had been retarded by the opiate of the preceding
night. He was visited by the vicar, who read prayers, and began to take
an account of the state of his soul, when those medicines produced their
effect; so that the parson was obliged to hold his nose while he poured
forth spiritual consolation from his mouth. The same expedient was used
by the knight and me, who, with the doctor, entered the chamber at this
juncture, and found Frogmore enthroned on an easing-chair, under the
pressure of a double evacuation. The short intervals betwixt every heave
he employed in crying for mercy, confessing his sins, or asking the
vicar's opinion of his case; and the vicar answered, in a solemn
snuffling tone, that heightened the ridicule of the scene. The emetic
having done its office, the doctor interfered, and ordered the patient
to be put in bed again. When he examined the egesta, and felt his pulse,
he declared that much of the virus was discharged, and, giving him a
composing draught, assured him he had good hopes of his recovery.--This
welcome hint he received with the tears of joy in his eyes, protesting,
that if he should recover, he would always think himself indebted for
his life to the great skill and tenderness of his doctor, whose hand he
squeezed with great fervour; and thus he was left to his repose.

We were pressed to stay dinner, that we might be witnesses of his
resuscitation; but my uncle insisted upon our departing before noon,
that we might reach this town before it should be dark.--In the
mean-time, lady Bullford conducted us into the garden to see a fishpond
just finished, which Mr Bramble censured as being too near the parlour,
where the knight now sat by himself, dozing in an elbow-chair after the
fatigues of his morning atchievement.--In this situation he reclined,
with his feet wrapped in flannel, and supported in a line with his body,
when the door flying open with a violent shock, lieutenant Lismahago
rushed into the room with horror in his looks, exclaiming, 'A mad dog!
a mad dog!' and throwing up the window sash, leaped into the garden--Sir
Thomas, waked by this tremendous exclamation, started up, and forgetting
his gout, followed the lieutenant's example by a kind of instinctive
impulse. He not only bolted thro' the window like an arrow from a bow,
but ran up to his middle in the pond before he gave the least sign of
recollection. Then the captain began to bawl, 'Lord have mercy upon
us!--pray, take care of the gentleman!--for God's sake, mind your
footing, my dear boy!--get warm blankets--comfort his poor carcase--warm
the bed in the green room.'

Lady Bullford was thunder-struck at this phaenomenon, and the rest of
the company gazed in silent astonishment, while the servants hastened
to assist their master, who suffered himself to be carried back into the
parlour without speaking a word.--Being instantly accommodated with dry
clothes and flannels, comforted with a cordial, and replaced in statu
quo, one of the maids was ordered to chafe his lower extremities, an
operation in consequence of which his senses seemed to return and his
good humour to revive.--As we had followed him into the room, he looked
at every individual in his turn, with a certain ludicrous expression in
his countenance, but fixed his eyes in particular upon Lismahago, who
presented him with a pinch of snuff, and when he took it in silence,
'Sir Thomas Bullford (said he), I am much obliged to you for all your
favours, and some of them I have endeavoured to repay in your own coin.'
'Give me thy hand (cried the baronet); thou hast indeed payed me Scot
and lot; and even left a balance in my hands, for which, in presence of
this company, I promise to be accountable.'--So saying, he laughed
very heartily, and even seemed to enjoy the retaliation which had been
exacted at his own expence; but lady Bullford looked very grave; and in
all probability thought the lieutenant had carried his resentment too
far, considering that her husband was valetudinary--but, according
to the proverb, he that will play at bowls must expect to meet with
rubbers. I have seen a tame bear, very diverting when properly managed,
become a very dangerous wild beast when teized for the entertainment of
the spectators.--As for Lismahago, he seemed to think the fright and the
cold bath would have a good effect upon his patient's constitution: but
the doctor hinted some apprehension that the gouty matter might, by such
a sudden shock, be repelled from the extremities and thrown upon some of
the more vital parts of the machine.--I should be very sorry to see this
prognostic verified upon our facetious landlord, who told Mrs Tabitha at
parting, that he hoped she would remember him in the distribution of
the bride's favours, as he had taken so much pains to put the captain's
parts and mettle to the proof.--After all, I am afraid our squire
will appear to be the greatest sufferer by the baronet's wit; for his
constitution is by no means calculated for night-alarms. He has yawned
and shivered all day, and gone to bed without supper; so that, as we
have got into good quarters, I imagine we shall make a halt to-morrow;
in which case, you will have at least one day's respite from the
persecution of

J. MELFORD Oct. 3.




To Mrs MARY JONES, at Brambleton-hall.

DEAR MARY JONES,

Miss Liddy is so good as to unclose me in a kiver as fur as Gloster,
and the carrier will bring it to hand--God send us all safe to
Monmouthshire, for I'm quite jaded with rambling--'Tis a true saying,
live and learn--0 woman, what chuckling and changing have I seen!--Well,
there's nothing sartain in this world--Who would have thought that
mistriss, after all the pains taken for the good of her prusias sole,
would go for to throw away her poor body? that she would cast the
heys of infection upon such a carrying-crow as Lashmihago! as old
as Mathewsullin, as dry as a red herring, and as poor as a starved
veezel--0, Molly, hadst thou seen him come down the ladder, in a shurt
so scanty, that it could not kiver his nakedness!--The young
'squire called him Dunquickset; but he looked for all the world like
Cradoc-ap-Morgan, the ould tinker, that suffered at Abergany for
steeling of kettle--Then he's a profane scuffle, and, as Mr Clinker
says, no better than an impfiddle, continually playing upon the pyebill
and the new-burth--I doubt he has as little manners as money; for he
can't say a civil word, much more make me a present of a pair of gloves
for goodwill; but he looks as if he wanted to be very forewood and
familiar O! that ever a gentlewoman of years and discretion should tare
her air, and cry and disporridge herself for such a nubjack! as the song
goes

I vow she would fain have a burd That bids such a price for an owl.

but, for sartain, he must have dealt with some Scotch musician to bring
her to this pass--As for me, I put my trust in the Lord; and I have got
a slice of witch elm sowed in the gathers of my under petticoat; and
Mr Clinker assures me, that by the new light of grease, I may deify the
devil and all his works--But I nose what I nose--If mistress should take
up with Lashmyhago, this is no sarvice for me--Thank God, there's no
want of places; and if it wan't for wan thing, I would--but, no matter
Madam Baynar's woman has twenty good pounds a-year and parquisites; and
dresses like a parson of distinkson--I dined with her and the valley
de shambles, with bags and golden jackets; but there was nothing
kimfittable to eat, being as how they lived upon board, and having
nothing but a piss of could cuddling tart and some blamangey, I was
tuck with the cullick, and a murcey it was that mistress had her viol of
assings in the cox.

But, as I was saying, I think for sartain this match will go forewood;
for things are come to a creesus; and I have seen with my own bays, such
smuggling--But I scorn for to exclose the secrets of the family; and
if it wance comes to marrying, who nose but the frolick may go round--I
believes as how, Miss Liddy would have no reversion if her swan would
appear; and you would be surprised, Molly, to receive a bride's fever
from your humble sarvant--but this is all suppository, dear girl; and I
have sullenly promised to Mr Clinker, that neither man, woman, nor child
shall no that arrow said a civil thing to me in the way of infection.
I hope to drink your health at Brambleton-hall, in a horn of October,
before the month be out--Pray let my bed be turned once a-day, and the
windore opened, while the weather is dry; and burn a few billets with
some brush in the footman's garret, and see their mattrash be dry as a
bone: for both our gentlemen have got a sad could by lying in damp shits
at sir Tummas Ballfart's. No more at present, but my sarvice to Saul and
the rest of our fellow-sarvents, being,

Dear Mary Jones, Always yours, WIN. JENKINS Oct. 4.




To Miss LAETITIA WILLIS, at Gloucester.

MY DEAR LETTY,

This method of writing to you from time to time, without any hopes of an
answer, affords me, I own, some ease and satisfaction in the 'midst of
my disquiet, as it in some degree lightens the burthen of affliction:
but it is at best a very imperfect enjoyment of friendship, because it
admits of no return of confidence and good counsel--I would give the
whole world to have your company for a single day--I am heartily
tired of this itinerant way of life. I am quite dizzy with a perpetual
succession of objects--Besides it is impossible to travel such a
length of way, without being exposed to inconveniencies, dangers, and
disagreeable accidents, which prove very grievous to a poor creature of
weak nerves like me, and make me pay very dear for the gratification of
my curiosity.

Nature never intended me for the busy world--I long for repose and
solitude, where I can enjoy that disinterested friendship which is not
to be found among crouds, and indulge those pleasing reveries that shun
the hurry and tumult of fashionable society--Unexperienced as I am in
the commerce of life, I have seen enough to give me a disgust to the
generality of those who carry it on--There is such malice, treachery,
and dissimulation, even among professed friends and intimate companions,
as cannot fail to strike a virtuous mind with horror; and when Vice
quits the stage for a moment, her place is immediately occupied by
Folly, which is often too serious to excite any thing but compassion.
Perhaps I ought to be silent on the foibles of my poor aunt; but with
you, my dear Willis, I have no secrets; and, truly, her weaknesses are
such as cannot be concealed. Since the first moment we arrived at Bath,
she has been employed constantly in spreading nets for the other sex;
and, at length, she has caught a superannuated lieutenant, who is in a
fair way to make her change her name--My uncle and my brother seem to
have no objection to this extraordinary match, which, I make no doubt,
will afford abundance of matter for conversation and mirth; for my part,
I am too sensible of my own weaknesses, to be diverted with those of
other people--At present, I have something at heart that employs my
whole attention, and keeps my mind in the utmost terror and suspence.

Yesterday in the forenoon, as I stood with my brother at the parlour
window of an inn, where we had lodged, a person passed a horseback, whom
(gracious Heaven!) I instantly discovered to be Wilson! He wore a white
riding-coat, with the cape buttoned up to his chin; looking remarkably
pale, and passed at a round trot, without seeming to observe us--Indeed,
he could not see us; for there was a blind that concealed us from the
view. You may guess how I was affected at this apparition. The light
forsook my eyes; and I was seized with such a palpitation and trembling,
that I could not stand. I sat down upon a couch, and strove to compose
myself, that my brother might not perceive my agitation; but it was
impossible to escape his prying eyes--He had observed the object that
alarmed me; and, doubtless, knew him at the first glance--He now looked
at me with a stern countenance; then he ran out into the street, to see
what road the unfortunate horseman had taken--He afterwards dispatched
his man for further intelligence, and seemed to meditate some violent
design. My uncle, being out of order, we remained another night at the
inn; and all day long Jery acted the part of an indefatigable spy upon
my conduct--He watched my very looks with such eagerness of attention,
as if he would have penetrated into the utmost recesses of my
heart--This may be owing to his regard for my honour, if it is not the
effect of his own pride; but he is so hot, and violent, and unrelenting,
that the sight of him alone throws me into a flutter; and really it
will not be in my power to afford him any share of my affection, if he
persists in persecuting me at this rate. I am afraid he has formed some
scheme of vengeance, which will make me completely wretched! I am afraid
he suspects some collusion from this appearance of Wilson.--Good God!
did he really appear? or was it only a phantom, a pale spectre to
apprise me of his death.

O Letty, what shall I do?--where shall I turn for advice and
consolation? shall I implore the protection of my uncle, who has been
always kind and compassionate.--This must be my last resource.--I dread
the thoughts of making him uneasy; and would rather suffer a thousand
deaths than live the cause of dissension in the family.--I cannot
conceive the meaning of Wilson's coming hither:--perhaps, it was in
quest of us, in order to disclose his real name and situation:--but
wherefore pass without staying to make the least enquiry?--My dear
Willis, I am lost in conjecture. I have not closed an eye since I saw
him.--All night long have I been tossed about from one imagination to
another. The reflection finds no resting place.--I have prayed, and
sighed, and wept plentifully.--If this terrible suspence continues much
longer, I shall have another fit of illness, and then the whole family
will be in confusion--If it was consistent with the wise purposes
of Providence, would I were in my grave--But it is my duty to be
resigned.--My dearest Letty, excuse my weakness--excuse these blots--my
tears fall so fast that I cannot keep the paper dry--yet I ought
to consider that I have as yet no cause to despair but I am such a
faint-hearted timorous creature!

Thank God, my uncle is much better than he was yesterday. He is resolved
to pursue our journey strait to Wales.--I hope we shall take Gloucester
in our way--that hope chears my poor heart I shall once more embrace my
best beloved Willis, and pour all my griefs into her friendly bosom.--0
heaven! is it possible that such happiness is reserved for

The dejected and forlorn LYDIA MELFORD Oct. 4.




To Sir WATKIN PHILLIPS, Bart. of Jesus college, Oxon.

DEAR WATKIN,

I yesterday met with an incident which I believe you will own to be very
surprising--As I stood with Liddy at the window of the inn where we
had lodged, who should pass by but Wilson a-horse back!--I could not be
mistaken in the person, for I had a full view of him as he advanced; I
plainly perceived by my sister's confusion that she recognized him at
the same time. I was equally astonished and incensed at his appearance,
which I could not but interpret into an insult, or something worse. I
ran out at the gate, and, seeing him turn the corner of the street, I
dispatched my servant to observe his motions, but the fellow was too
late to bring me that satisfaction. He told me, however, that there was
an inn, called the Red Lion, at that end of the town, where he supposed
the horseman had alighted, but that he would not enquire without further
orders. I sent him back immediately to know what strangers were in the
house, and he returned with a report that there was one Mr Wilson lately
arrived. In consequence of this information I charged him with a note
directed to that gentleman, desiring him to meet me in half an hour in
a certain field at the town's end, with a case of pistols, in order
to decide the difference which could not be determined at our last
rencounter: but I did not think proper to subscribe the billet. My man
assured me he had delivered it into his own hand; and, that having read
it, he declared he would wait upon the gentleman at the place and time
appointed.

M'Alpine being an old soldier, and luckily sober at the time, I
entrusted him with my secret. I ordered him to be within call, and,
having given him a letter to be delivered to my uncle in case of
accident, I repaired to the rendezvous, which was an inclosed field at
a little distance from the highway. I found my antagonist had already
taken his ground, wrapped in a dark horseman's coat, with a laced hat
flapped over his eyes; but what was my astonishment, when, throwing off
this wrapper, he appeared to be a person whom I had never seen before!
He had one pistol stuck in a leather belt, and another in his hand ready
for action, and, advancing a few steps, called to know if I was ready--I
answered, 'No,' and desired a parley; upon which he turned the muzzle
of his piece towards the earth; then replaced it in his belt, and met me
half way--When I assured him he was not the man I expected to meet, he
said it might be so: that he had received a slip of paper directed to Mr
Wilson, requesting him to come hither; and that as there was no other in
the place of that name, he naturally concluded the note was intended
for him, and him only--I then gave him to understand, that I had been
injured by a person who assumed that name, which person I had actually
seen within the hour, passing through the street on horseback; that
hearing there was a Mr Wilson at the Red Lion, I took it for granted he
was the man, and in that belief had writ the billet; and I expressed my
surprize, that he, who was a stranger to me and my concerns, should give
me such a rendezvous, without taking the trouble to demand a previous
explanation. He replied, that there was no other of his name in the
whole country; that no such horseman had alighted at the Red Lion since
nine o'clock, when he arrived--that having had the honour to serve his
majesty, he thought he could not decently decline any invitation of
this kind, from what quarter soever it might come, and that if any
explanation was necessary, it did not belong to him to demand it, but
to the gentleman who summoned him into the field. Vexed as I was at this
adventure, I could not help admiring the coolness of this officer, whose
open countenance prepossessed me in his favour. He seemed to be turned
of forty; wore his own short black hair, which curled naturally about
his ears, and was very plain in his apparel--When I begged pardon for
the trouble I had given him, he received my apology with great good
humour.--He told me that he lived about ten miles off, at a small
farm-house, which would afford me tolerable lodging, if I would come
and take diversion of hunting with him for a few weeks; in which case we
might, perhaps, find out the man who had given me offence--I thanked him
very sincerely for his courteous offer, which, I told him, I was not at
liberty to accept at present, on account of my being engaged in a
family party; and so we parted, with mutual professions of good will and
esteem.

Now tell me, dear knight, what am I to make of this singular adventure?
Am I to suppose that the horseman I saw was really a thing of flesh
and blood, or a bubble that vanished into air?--or must I imagine Liddy
knows more of the matter than she chuses to disclose?--If I thought
her capable of carrying on any clandestine correspondence with such a
fellow, I should at once discard all tenderness, and forget that she was
connected with me by the ties of blood--But how is it possible that
a girl of her simplicity and inexperience, should maintain such an
intercourse, surrounded, as she is, with so many eyes, destitute of all
opportunity, and shifting quarters every day of her life!--Besides, she
has solemnly promised. No--I can't think the girl so base--so insensible
to the honour of her family.--What disturbs me chiefly, is the
impression which these occurrences seem to make upon her spirits--These
are the symptoms from which I conclude that the rascal has still a hold
on her affection, surely I have a right to call him a rascal, and to
conclude that his designs are infamous. But it shall be my fault if he
does not one day repent his presumption--I confess I cannot think, much
less write on this subject, with any degree of temper or patience; I
shall therefore conclude with telling you, that we hope to be in Wales
by the latter end of the month: but before that period you will probably
hear again from

your affectionate J. MELFORD Oct. 4.




To Sir WATKIN PHILLIPS, Bart. of Jesus college, Oxon.

DEAR PHILLIPS,

When I wrote you by last post, I did not imagine I should be tempted to
trouble you again so soon: but I now sit down with a heart so full that
it cannot contain itself; though I am under such agitation of spirits,
that you are to expect neither method nor connexion in this address--We
have been this day within a hair's breadth of losing honest Matthew
Bramble, in consequence of a cursed accident, which I will endeavour
to explain.--In crossing the country to get into the post road, it was
necessary to ford a river, and we that were a-horseback passed without
any danger or difficulty; but a great quantity of rain having fallen
last night and this morning, there was such an accumulation of water,
that a mill-head gave way, just as the coach was passing under it, and
the flood rushed down with such impetuosity, as first floated, and then
fairly overturned the carriage in the middle of the stream--Lismahago
and I, and the two servants, alighting instantaneously, ran into the
river to give all the assistance in our power.--Our aunt, Mrs Tabitha,
who had the good fortune to be uppermost, was already half way out of
the coach window, when her lover approaching, disengaged her entirely;
but, whether his foot slipt, or the burthen was too great, they fell
over head and ears in each others' arms. He endeavoured more than once
to get up, and even to disentangle himself from her embrace, but she
hung about his neck like a mill-stone (no bad emblem of matrimony), and
if my man had not proved a stanch auxiliary, those two lovers would in
all probability have gone hand in hand to the shades below--For my part,
I was too much engaged to take any cognizance of their distress.--I
snatched out my sister by the hair of the head, and, dragging her to
the bank, recollected that my uncle had, not yet appeared--Rushing again
into the stream, I met Clinker hauling ashore Mrs Jenkins, who looked
like a mermaid with her hair dishevelled about her ears; but, when I
asked if his master was safe, he forthwith shook her from him, and
she must have gone to pot, if a miller had not seasonably come to her
relief.--As for Humphry, he flew like lightning, to the coach, that was
by this time filled with water, and, diving into it, brought up the poor
'squire, to all appearance, deprived of life--It is not in my power to
describe what I felt at this melancholy spectacle--it was such an agony
as baffles all description! The faithful Clinker, taking him up in his
arms, as if he had been an infant of six months, carried him ashore,
howling most piteously all the way, and I followed him in a transport of
grief and consternation--When he was laid upon the grass and turned from
side to side, a great quantity of water ran out at his mouth, then he
opened his eyes, and fetched a deep sigh. Clinker perceiving these signs
of life, immediately tied up his arm with a garter, and, pulling out a
horse-fleam, let him blood in the farrier stile.--At first a few drops
only issued from the orifice, but the limb being chafed, in a little
time the blood began to flow in a continued stream, and he uttered some
incoherent words, which were the most welcome sounds that ever saluted
my ear. There was a country inn hard by, the landlord of which had by
this time come with his people to give their assistance.--Thither my
uncle being carried, was undressed and put to bed, wrapped in warm
blankets; but having been moved too soon, he fainted away, and once more
lay without sense or motion, notwithstanding all the efforts of Clinker
and the landlord, who bathed his temples with Hungary water, and held a
smelling-bottle to his nose. As I had heard of the efficacy of salt in
such cases, I ordered all that was in the house to be laid under his
head and body; and whether this application had the desired effect,
or nature of herself prevailed, he, in less than a quarter of an hour,
began to breathe regularly, and soon retrieved his recollection, to the
unspeakable joy of all the by-standers. As for Clinker, his brain
seemed to be affected.--He laughed, and wept, and danced about in such
a distracted manner, that the landlord very judiciously conveyed him out
of the room. My uncle, seeing me dropping wet, comprehended the whole
of what had happened, and asked if all the company was safe?--Being
answered in the affirmative, he insisted upon my putting on dry clothes;
and, having swallowed a little warm wine, desired he might be left to
his repose. Before I went to shift myself, I inquired about the rest
of the family--I found Mrs Tabitha still delirious from her fright,
discharging very copiously the water she had swallowed. She was
supported by the captain, distilling drops from his uncurled periwig, so
lank and so dank, that he looked like Father Thames without his sedges,
embracing Isis, while she cascaded in his urn. Mrs Jenkins was present
also, in a loose bed gown, without either cap or handkerchief; but she
seemed to be as little compos mentis as her mistress, and acted so many
cross purposes in the course of her attendance, that, between the two,
Lismahago had occasion for all his philosophy. As for Liddy, I thought
the poor girl would have actually lost her senses. The good woman of the
house had shifted her linen, and put her into bed; but she was seized
with the idea that her uncle had perished, and in this persuasion made a
dismal out-cry; nor did she pay the least regard to what I said, when
I solemnly assured her he was safe. Mr Bramble hearing the noise, and
being informed of her apprehension, desired she might be brought into
his chamber; and she no sooner received this intimation, than she ran
thither half naked, with the wildest expression of eagerness in her
countenance--Seeing the 'squire sitting up in the bed, she sprung
forwards and throwing her arms about his neck, exclaimed in a most
pathetic tone, 'Are you--Are you indeed my uncle--My dear uncle!--My
best friend! My father!--Are you really living? or is it an illusion of
my poor brain!' Honest Matthew was so much affected, that he could not
help shedding tears, while he kissed her forehead, saying, 'My dear
Liddy, I hope I shall live long enough to shew how sensible I am of your
affection--But your spirits are fluttered, child--You want rest--Go
to bed and compose yourself'--'Well, I will (she replied) but still
methinks this cannot be real--The coach was full of water--My uncle
was under us all--Gracious God!--You was under water--How did you get
out;--tell me that? or I shall think this is all a deception'--'In what
manner I was brought out, I know as little as you do, my dear (said
the 'squire); and, truly, that is a circumstance of which I want to be
informed.' I would have given him a detail of the whole adventure, but
he would not hear me until I should change my clothes; so that I had
only time to tell him, that he owed his life to the courage and fidelity
of Clinker: and having given him this hint, I conducted my sister to her
own chamber.

This accident happened about three o'clock in the afternoon, and in
little more than an hour the hurricane was all over; but as the carriage
was found to be so much damaged, that it could not proceed without
considerable repairs, a blacksmith and wheelwright were immediately sent
for to the next market-town, and we congratulated ourselves upon being
housed at an inn, which, though remote from the post-road, afforded
exceeding good lodging. The women being pretty well composed, and the
men all a-foot, my uncle sent for his servant, and, in the presence of
Lismahago and me, accosted him in these words--'So, Clinker, I find you
are resolved I shan't die by water--As you have fished me up from the
bottom at your own risque, you are at least entitled to all the money
that was in my pocket, and there it is'--So saying, he presented him
with a purse containing thirty guineas, and a ring nearly of the same
value--'God forbid! (cried Clinker), your honour shall excuse me--I am
a poor fellow, but I have a heart O! if your honour did but know how
I rejoice to see--Blessed be his holy name, that made me the humble
instrument--But as for the lucre of gain, I renounce it--I have done no
more than my duty--No more than I would have done for the most worthless
of my fellow-creatures--No more than I would have done for captain
Lismahago, or Archy Macalpine, or any sinner upon earth--But for your
worship, I would go through fire as well as water'--'I do believe it,
Humphry (said the 'squire); but as you think it was your duty to save my
life at the hazard of your own, I think it is mine to express the sense
I have of your extraordinary fidelity and attachment--I insist upon your
receiving this small token of my gratitude; but don't imagine that I
look upon this as an adequate recompence for the service you have done
me--I have determined to settle thirty pounds a-year upon you for life;
and I desire these gentlemen will bear witness to this my intention, of
which I have a memorandum in my pocketbook.' 'Lord make me thankful for
all these mercies! (cried Clinker, sobbing), I have been a poor bankrupt
from the beginning--your honour's goodness found me, when I was--naked
when I was--sick and forlorn--I understand your honour's looks--I would
not give offence--but my heart is very full--and if your worship won't
give me leave to speak,--I must vent it in prayers to heaven for my
benefactor.' When he quitted the room, Lismahago said, he should have
a much better opinion of his honesty, if he did not whine and cant so
abominably; but that he had always observed those weeping and praying
fellows were hypocrites at bottom. Mr Bramble made no reply to this
sarcastic remark, proceeding from the lieutenant's resentment of Clinker
having, in pure simplicity of heart, ranked him with M'Alpine and the
sinners of the earth--The landlord being called to receive some orders
about the beds, told the 'squire that his house was very much at his
service, but he was sure he should not have the honour to lodge him and
his company. He gave us to understand that his master who lived hard
by, would not suffer us to be at a public house, when there was
accommodation for us at his own; and that, if he had not dined abroad in
the neighbourhood he would have undoubtedly come to offer his services
at our first arrival. He then launched out in praise of that gentleman,
whom he had served as butler, representing him as a perfect miracle of
goodness and generosity. He said he was a person of great learning, and
allowed to be the best farmer in the country:--that he had a lady who
was as much beloved as himself, and an only son, a very hopeful young
gentleman, just recovered from a dangerous fever, which had like to have
proved fatal to the whole family; for, if the son had died, he was sure
the parents would not have survived their loss--He had not yet
finished the encomium of Mr Dennison, when this gentleman arrived in a
post-chaise, and his appearance seemed to justify all that had been said
in his favour. He is pretty well advanced in years, but hale, robust,
and florid, with an ingenuous countenance, expressive of good sense and
humanity. Having condoled with us on the accident which had happened,
he said he was come to conduct us to his habitation, where we should be
less incommoded than at such a paultry inn, and expressed his hope that
the ladies would not be the worse for going thither in his carriage, as
the distance was not above a quarter of a mile. My uncle having made a
proper return to this courteous exhibition, eyed him attentively, and
then asked if he had not been at Oxford, a commoner of Queen's college?
When Mr Dennison answered, 'Yes,' with some marks of surprise--'Look
at me then (said our squire) and let us see if you can recollect
the features of an old friend, whom you have not seen these forty
years.'--The gentleman, taking him by the hand, and gazing at him
earnestly,--'I protest (cried he), I do think I recall the idea
of Matthew Loyd of Glamorganshire, who was student of Jesus.' 'Well
remembered, my dear friend, Charles Dennison (exclaimed my uncle,
pressing him to his breast), I am that very identical Matthew Loyd of
Glamorgan.' Clinker, who had just entered the room with some coals for
the fire, no sooner heard these words, than throwing down the scuttle
on the toes of Lismahago, he began to caper as if he was mad,
crying--'Matthew Loyd of Glamorgan!--O Providence!--Matthew Loyd
of Glamorgan!'--Then, clasping my uncle's knees, he went on in this
manner--'Your worship must forgive me--Matthew Loyd of Glamorgan!--O
Lord, Sir! I can't contain myself!--I shall lose my senses'--'Nay,
thou hast lost them already, I believe (said the 'squire, peevishly),
prithee, Clinker, be quiet--What is the matter?'--Humphry, fumbling in
his bosom, pulled out an old wooden snuff-box, which he presented in
great trepidation to his master, who, opening it immediately, perceived
a small cornelian seal, and two scraps of paper--At sight of these
articles he started, and changed colour, and casting his eye upon the
inscriptions--'Ha!--how!--what! where (cried he) is the person here
named?' Clinker, knocking his own breast, could hardly pronounce
these words--'Here--here--here is Matthew Loyd, as the certificate
sheweth--Humphry Clinker was the name of the farrier that took me
'prentice'--'And who gave you these tokens?' said my uncle hastily--'My
poor mother on her death-bed'--replied the other--'And who was your
mother?' 'Dorothy Twyford, an please your honour, heretofore bar-keeper
at the Angel at Chippenham.'--'And why were not these tokens produced
before?' 'My mother told me she had wrote to Glamorganshire, at the
time of my birth, but had no answer; and that afterwards, when she
made enquiry, there was no such person in that county.' 'And so in
consequence of my changing my name and going abroad at that very time,
thy poor mother and thou have been left to want and misery--I am really
shocked at the consequence of my own folly.'--Then, laying his hand
on Clinker's head, he added, 'Stand forth, Matthew Loyd--You see,
gentlemen, how the sins of my youth rise up in judgment against me--Here
is my direction written with my own hand, and a seal which I left at
the woman's request; and this is a certificate of the child's baptism,
signed by the curate of the parish.' The company were not a little
surprised at this discovery, upon which Mr Dennison facetiously
congratulated both the father and the son: for my part, I shook my
new-found cousin heartily by the hand, and Lismahago complimented him
with the tears in his eyes, for he had been hopping about the room,
swearing in broad Scotch, and bellowing with the pain occasioned by the
fall of the coalscuttle upon his foot. He had even vowed to drive the
saul out of the body of that mad rascal: but, perceiving the unexpected
turn which things had taken, he wished him joy of his good fortune,
observing that it went very near his heart, as he was like to be a great
toe out of pocket by the discovery--Mr Dennison now desired to know
for what reason my uncle had changed the name by which he knew him at
Oxford, and our 'squire satisfied him, by answering to this effect--'I
took my mother's name, which was Loyd, as heir to her lands in
Glamorganshire; but when I came of age, I sold that property, in order
to clear my paternal estate, and resumed my real name; so that I am now
Matthew Bramble of Brambleton-hall in Monmouthshire, at your service;
and this is my nephew, Jeremy Melford of Belfield, in the county of
Glamorgan.' At that instant the ladies entering the room, he presented
Mrs Tabitha as his sister, and Liddy as his niece. The old gentleman
saluted them very cordially, and seemed struck with the appearance of my
sister, whom he could not help surveying with a mixture of complacency
and surprize--'Sister (said my uncle), there is a poor relation that
recommends himself to your good graces--The quondam Humphry Clinker is
metamorphosed into Matthew Loyd; and claims the honour of being your
carnal kinsman--in short, the rogue proves to be a crab of my own
planting in the days of hot blood and unrestrained libertinism.' Clinker
had by this time dropt upon one knee, by the side of Mrs Tabitha,
who, eyeing him askance, and flirting her fan with marks of agitation,
thought proper, after some conflict, to hold out her hand for him to
kiss, saying, with a demure aspect, 'Brother, you have been very wicked:
but I hope you'll live to see the folly of your ways--I am very sorry to
say the young man, whom you have this day acknowledged, has more
grace and religion, by the gift of God, than you with all your profane
learning, and repeated opportunity--I do think he has got the trick of
the eye, and the tip of the nose of my uncle Loyd of Flluydwellyn; and
as for the long chin, it is the very moral of the governor's--Brother,
as you have changed his name pray change his dress also; that livery
doth not become any person that hath got our blood in his veins.'--Liddy
seemed much pleased with this acquisition to the family.--She took him
by the hand, declaring she should always be proud to own her connexion
with a virtuous young man, who had given so many proofs of his gratitude
and affection to her uncle.--Mrs. Winifred Jenkins, extremely fluttered
between her surprize at this discovery, and the apprehension of losing
her sweet-heart, exclaimed in a giggling tone,--'I wish you joy Mr
Clinker--Floyd--I would say--hi, hi, hi!--you'll be so proud you won't
look at your poor fellow servants, oh, oh, oh!' Honest Clinker owned
he was overjoyed at his good fortune, which was greater than he
deserved--'But wherefore should I be proud? (said he) a poor object
conceived in sin, and brought forth in iniquity, nursed in a parish
workhouse, and bred in a smithy. Whenever I seem proud, Mrs Jenkins, I
beg of you to put me in mind of the condition I was in, when I first saw
you between Chippenham and Marlborough.'

When this momentous affair was discussed to the satisfaction of all
parties concerned, the weather being dry, the ladies declined the
carriage; so that we walked all together to Mr Dennison's house, where
we found the tea ready prepared by his lady, an amiable matron, who
received us with all the benevolence of hospitality. The house is old
fashioned and irregular, but lodgeable and commodious. To the south it
has the river in front, at the distance of a hundred paces; and on the
north, there is a rising ground covered with an agreeable plantation;
the greens and walks are kept in the nicest order, and all is rural and
romantic. I have not yet seen the young gentleman, who is on a visit to
a friend in the neighbourhood, from whose house he is not expected 'till
to-morrow.

In the mean time, as there is a man going to the next market town with
letters for the post, I take this opportunity to send you the history of
this day, which has been remarkably full of adventures; and you will
own I give you them like a beef-steak at Dolly's, hot and hot, without
ceremony and parade, just as they come from the recollection of

Yours, J. MELFORD




To Dr LEWIS.

DEAR DICK,

Since the last trouble I gave you, I have met with a variety of
incidents, some of them of a singular nature, which I reserve as a fund
for conversation; but there are others so interesting, that they will
not keep in petto till meeting.

Know then, it was a thousand pounds to a sixpence, that you should now
be executing my will, instead of perusing my letter! Two days ago, our
coach was overturned in the midst of a rapid river, where my life was
saved with the utmost difficulty, by the courage, activity, and
presence of mind of my servant Humphry Clinker--But this is not the
most surprising circumstance of the adventure--The said Humphry Clinker
proves to be Matthew Loyd, natural son of one Matthew Loyd of Glamorgan,
if you know any such person--You see, Doctor, that notwithstanding all
your philosophy, it is not without some reason that the Welchmen ascribe
such energy to the force of blood--But we shall discuss this point on
some future occasion.

This is not the only discovery which I made in consequence of our
disaster--We happened to be wrecked upon a friendly shore--The lord
of the manor is no other than Charles Dennison, our fellow-rake at
Oxford--We are now happily housed with that gentleman, who has really
attained to that pitch of rural felicity, at which I have been aspiring
these twenty years in vain. He is blessed with a consort, whose
disposition is suited to his own in all respects; tender, generous, and
benevolent--She, moreover, possesses an uncommon share of understanding,
fortitude, and discretion, and is admirably qualified to be his
companion, confidant, counsellor, and coadjutrix. These excellent
persons have an only son, about nineteen years of age, just such a
youth as they could have wished that Heaven would bestow to fill up the
measure of their enjoyment--In a word, they know no other allay to
their happiness, but their apprehension and anxiety about the life and
concerns of this beloved object.

Our old friend, who had the misfortune to be a second brother, was bred
to the law, and even called to the bar; but he did not find himself
qualified to shine in that province, and had very little inclination for
his profession--He disobliged his father, by marrying for love, without
any consideration of fortune; so that he had little or nothing to
depend upon for some years but his practice, which afforded him a bare
subsistence; and the prospect of an increasing family, began to give
him disturbance and disquiet. In the mean time, his father dying, was
succeeded by his elder brother, a fox-hunter and a sot, who neglected
his affairs, insulted and oppressed his servants, and in a few years had
well nigh ruined the estate, when he was happily carried off by a fever,
the immediate consequence of a debauch. Charles, with the approbation of
his wife, immediately determined to quit business, and retire into the
country, although this resolution was strenuously and zealously opposed
by every individual, whom he consulted on the subject. Those who had
tried the experiment, assured him that he could not pretend to breathe
in the country for less than the double of what his estate produced;
that, in order to be upon the footing of a gentleman, he would be
obliged to keep horses, hounds, carriages, with a suitable number of
servants, and maintain an elegant table for the entertainment of his
neighbours; that farming was a mystery, known only to those who had been
bred up to it from the cradle, the success of it depending not only
upon skill and industry, but also upon such attention and oeconomy as
no gentleman could be supposed to give or practise; accordingly, every
attempt made by gentlemen miscarried, and not a few had been ruined by
their prosecution of agriculture--Nay, they affirmed that he would find
it cheaper to buy hay and oats for his cattle, and to go to market
for poultry, eggs, kitchen herbs, and roots, and every the most
inconsiderable article of house-keeping, than to have those articles
produced on his own ground.

These objections did not deter Mr Dennison, because they were chiefly
founded on the supposition, that he would be obliged to lead a life of
extravagance and dissipation, which he and his consort equally detested,
despised, and determined to avoid--The objects he had in view, were
health of body, peace of mind, and the private satisfaction of domestic
quiet, unallayed by actual want, and uninterrupted by the fears of
indigence--He was very moderate in his estimate of the necessaries, and
even of the comforts of life--He required nothing but wholesome air,
pure water, agreeable exercise, plain diet, convenient lodging, and
decent apparel. He reflected, that if a peasant without education, or
any great share of natural sagacity, could maintain a large family, and
even become opulent upon a farm, for which he payed an annual rent of
two or three hundred pounds to the landlord, surely he himself might
hope for some success from his industry, having no rent to pay, but,
on the contrary, three or four hundred pounds a year to receive. He
considered, that the earth was an indulgent mother, that yielded her
fruits to all her children without distinction. He had studied the
theory of agriculture with a degree of eagerness and delight; and he
could not conceive there was any mystery in the practice, but what he
should be able to disclose by dint of care and application. With respect
to houshold expence, he entered into a minute detail and investigation,
by which he perceived the assertions of his friends were altogether
erroneous--He found he should save sixty pounds a year in the
single article of house-rent, and as much more in pocket-money and
contingencies; that even butcher's-meat was twenty per cent cheaper in
the country than in London; but that poultry, and almost every other
circumstance of house-keeping, might be had for less than one-half of
what they cost in town; besides, a considerable saving on the side of
dress, in being delivered from the oppressive imposition of ridiculous
modes, invented by ignorance, and adopted by folly.

As to the danger of vying with the rich in pomp and equipage, it never
gave him the least disturbance. He was now turned of forty, and, having
lived half that time in the busy scenes of life, was well skilled in the
science of mankind. There cannot be in nature a more contemptible figure
than that of a man, who, with five hundred a year, presumes to rival
in expence a neighbour who possesses five times that income--His
ostentation, far from concealing, serves only to discover his indigence,
and render his vanity the more shocking; for it attracts the eyes of
censure, and excites the spirit of inquiry. There is not a family in the
county nor a servant in his own house, nor a farmer in the parish, but
what knows the utmost farthing that his lands produce, and all
these behold him with scorn or compassion. I am surprised that these
reflections do not occur to persons in this unhappy dilemma, and produce
a salutary effect; but the truth is, of all the passions incident
to human nature, vanity is that which most effectually perverts the
faculties of the understanding; nay, it sometimes becomes so incredibly
depraved, as to aspire at infamy, and find pleasure in bearing the
stigmas of reproach.

I have now given you a sketch of the character and situation of Mr
Dennison, when he came down to take possession of this estate; but as
the messenger, who carries the letters to the next town, is just setting
off, I shall reserve what further I have to say on this subject, till
the next post, when you shall certainly hear from


Yours always, MATT. BRAMBLE Oct. 8.




To Dr LEWIS.

Once more, dear doctor, I resume the pen for your amusement. It was
on the morning after our arrival that, walking out with my friend, Mr
Dennison, I could not help breaking forth into the warmest expressions
of applause at the beauty of the scene, which is really inchanting; and
I signified, in particular, how much I was pleased with the disposition
of some detached groves, that afforded at once shelter and ornament to
his habitation.

'When I took possession of these lands, about two and twenty years ago
(said he), there was not a tree standing within a mile of the house,
except those of an old neglected orchard, which produced nothing
but leaves and moss.--It was in the gloomy month of November, when I
arrived, and found the house in such a condition, that it might have
been justly stiled the tower of desolation.--The court-yard was covered
with nettles and docks, and the garden exhibited such a rank plantation
of weeds as I had never seen before;--the window-shutters were falling
in pieces,--the sashes broken;--and owls and jack-daws had taken
possession of the chimnies.--The prospect within was still more
dreary--All was dark, and damp, and dirty beyond description;--the rain
penetrated in several parts of the roof;--in some apartments the very
floors had given way;--the hangings were parted from the walls, and
shaking in mouldy remnants; the glasses were dropping out of their
frames;--the family-pictures were covered with dust and all the chairs
and tables worm-eaten and crazy.--There was not a bed in the house that
could be used, except one old-fashioned machine, with a high gilt tester
and fringed curtains of yellow mohair, which had been, for aught I know,
two centuries in the family.--In short, there was no furniture but the
utensils of the kitchen; and the cellar afforded nothing but a few empty
butts and barrels, that stunk so abominably, that I would not suffer
any body to enter it until I had flashed a considerable quantity of
gunpowder to qualify the foul air within.

'An old cottager and his wife, who were hired to lie in the house, had
left it with precipitation, alledging, among other causes of retreat,
that they could not sleep for frightful noises, and that my poor
brother certainly walked after his death.--In a word, the house appeared
uninhabitable; the barn, stable, and outhouses were in ruins; all the
fences broken down, and the fields lying waste.

'The farmer who kept the key never dreamed I had any intention to live
upon the spot--He rented a farm of sixty pounds, and his lease was just
expiring.--He had formed a scheme of being appointed bailiff to the
estate, and of converting the house and the adjacent grounds to his own
use.--A hint of his intention I received from the curate at my first
arrival; I therefore did not pay much regard to what he said by way of
discouraging me from coming to settle in the country; but I was a little
startled when he gave me warning that he should quit the farm at the
expiration of his lease, unless I could abate considerably in the rent.

'At this period I accidentally became acquainted with a person, whose
friendship laid the foundation of all my prosperity. In the next
market-town I chanced to dine at an inn with a Mr Wilson, who was lately
come to settle in the neighbourhood.--He had been lieutenant of a man of
war, but quitted the sea in some disgust, and married the only daughter
of farmer Bland, who lives in this parish, and has acquired a good
fortune in the way of husbandry.--Wilson is one of the best natured
men I ever knew; brave, frank, obliging, and ingenuous--He liked my
conversation, I was charmed with his liberal manner; and acquaintance
immediately commenced, and this was soon improved into a friendship
without reserve.--There are characters which, like similar particles of
matter, strongly attract each other.--He forthwith introduced me to his
father-in-law, farmer Bland, who was well acquainted with every acre
of my estate, of consequence well qualified to advise me on this
occasion.--Finding I was inclined to embrace a country life, and even
to amuse myself with the occupation of farming, he approved of my
design--He gave me to understand that all my farms were underlett; that
the estate was capable of great improvement; that there was plenty of
chalk in the neighbourhood; and that my own ground produced excellent
marle for manure.--With respect to the farm, which was like to fall into
my hands, he said he would willingly take it at the present rent; but
at the same time owned, that if I would expend two hundred pounds in
enclosure, it would be worth more than double the sum.

'Thus encouraged, I began the execution of my scheme without further
delay, and plunged into a sea of expence, though I had no fund in
reserve, and the whole produce of the estate did not exceed three
hundred pounds a year--In one week, my house was made weather-tight, and
thoroughly cleansed from top to bottom; then it was well ventilated by
throwing all the doors and windows open, and making blazing fires of
wood in every chimney from the kitchen to the garrets. The floors were
repaired, the sashes new glazed, and out of the old furniture of the
whole house, I made shift to fit up a parlour and three chambers in
a plain yet decent manner.--The court-yard was cleared of weeds and
rubbish, and my friend Wilson charged himself with the dressing of
the garden; bricklayers were set at work upon the barn and stable; and
labourers engaged to restore the fences, and begin the work of
hedging and ditching, under the direction of farmer Bland, at whose
recommendation I hired a careful hind to lie in the house, and keep
constant fires in the apartments.

'Having taken these measures, I returned to London, where I forthwith
sold off my household-furniture, and, in three weeks from my first
visit, brought my wife hither to keep her Christmas.--Considering the
gloomy season of the year, the dreariness of the place, and the decayed
aspect of our habitation, I was afraid that her resolution would sink
under the sudden transition from a town life to such a melancholy state
of rustication; but I was agreeably disappointed.--She found the reality
less uncomfortable than the picture I had drawn.--By this time indeed,
things were mended in appearance--The out-houses had risen out of their
ruins; the pigeon-house was rebuilt, and replenished by Wilson, who also
put my garden in decent order, and provided a good stock of poultry,
which made an agreeable figure in my yard; and the house, on the whole,
looked like the habitation of human creatures.--Farmer Bland spared me a
milch cow for my family, and an ordinary saddle-horse for my servant to
go to market at the next town.--I hired a country lad for a footman, the
hind's daughter was my house-maid, and my wife had brought a cook-maid
from London.

'Such was my family when I began house-keeping in this place, with three
hundred pounds in my pocket, raised from the sale of my superfluous
furniture.--I knew we should find occupation enough through the day to
employ our time; but I dreaded the long winter evenings; yet, for those
too we found a remedy: The curate, who was a single man, soon became so
naturalized to the family, that he generally lay in the house; and his
company was equally agreeable and useful. He was a modest man, a good
scholar, and perfectly well qualified to instruct me in such country
matters as I wanted to know.--Mr Wilson brought his wife to see us, and
she became so fond of Mrs Dennison, that she said she was never so happy
as when she enjoyed the benefit of her conversation.--She was then a
fine buxom country lass, exceedingly docile, and as good-natured as her
husband Jack Wilson; so that a friendship ensued among the women, which
hath continued to this day.

'As for Jack, he hath been my constant companion, counsellor, and
commissary.--I would not for a hundred pounds you should leave my house
without seeing him.--Jack is an universal genius--his talents are really
astonishing:--He is an excellent carpenter, joiner, and turner, and
a cunning artist in iron and brass.--He not only superintended my
oeconomy, but also presided over my pastimes--He taught me to brew
beer, to make cyder, perry, mead, usquebaugh, and plague-water; to cook
several outlandish delicacies, such as ollas, pepper-pots, pillaws,
corys, chabobs, and stufatas.--He understands all manner of games from
chess down to chuck-farthing, sings a good song, plays upon the violin,
and dances a hornpipe with surprising agility.--He and I walked, and
rode, and hunted, and fished together, without minding the vicissitudes
of the weather; and I am persuaded, that in a raw, moist climate, like
this of England, continual exercise is as necessary as food to the
preservation of the individual.--In the course of two and twenty
years, there has not been one hour's interruption or abatement in the
friendship subsisting between Wilson's family and mine; and, what is
a rare instance of good fortune, that friendship is continued to our
children.--His son and mine are nearly of the same age and the same
disposition; they have been bred up together at the same school and
college, and love each other with the warmest affection.

'By Wilson's means, I likewise formed an acquaintance with a sensible
physician, who lives in the next market-town; and his sister, an
agreeable old maiden, passed the Christmas holidays at our house. Mean
while I began my farming with great eagerness, and that very winter
planted these groves that please you so much.--As for the neighbouring
gentry, I had no trouble from that quarter during my first campaign;
they were all gone to town before I settled in the country; and by the
summer I had taken measures to defend myself from their attacks.--When a
gay equipage came to my gates, I was never at home; those who visited
me in a modest way, I received; and according to the remarks I made on
their characters and conversation, either rejected their advances, or
returned their civility--I was in general despised among the fashionable
company, as a low fellow, both in breeding and circumstances;
nevertheless, I found a few individuals of moderate fortune, who gladly
adopted my stile of living; and many others would have acceded to our
society, had they not been prevented by the pride, envy, and ambition of
their wives and daughters.--Those, in times of luxury and dissipation,
are the rocks upon which all the small estates in the country are
wrecked.

'I reserved in my own hands, some acres of ground adjacent to the house,
for making experiments in agriculture, according to the directions of
Lyle, Tull, Hart, Duhamel, and others who have written on this subject;
and qualified their theory with the practical observations of farmer
Bland, who was my great master in the art of husbandry.--In short, I
became enamoured of a country life; and my success greatly exceeded my
expectation--I drained bogs, burned heath, grubbed up furze and fern;
I planted copse and willows where nothing else would grow; I gradually
inclosed all my farms, and made such improvements that my estate now
yields me clear twelve hundred pounds a year--All this time my wife
and I have enjoyed uninterrupted health, and a regular flow of spirits,
except on a very few occasions, when our cheerfulness was invaded by
such accidents as are inseparable from the condition of life. I lost
two children in their infancy, by the small-pox, so that I have one son
only, in whom all our hopes are centered.--He went yesterday to visit
a friend, with whom he has stayed all night, but he will be here to
dinner.--I shall this day have the pleasure of presenting him to you
and your family; and I flatter myself you will find him not altogether
unworthy of our affection.

'The truth is, either I am blinded by the partiality of a parent, or
he is a boy of very amiable character; and yet his conduct has given us
unspeakable disquiet.--You must know, we had projected a match between
him and a gentleman's daughter in the next county, who will in all
probability be heiress of a considerable fortune; but, it seems, he had
a personal disgust to the alliance. He was then at Cambridge, and tried
to gain time on various pretences; but being pressed in letters by his
mother and me to give a definitive answer, he fairly gave his tutor the
slip, and disappeared about eight months ago.--Before he took this rash
step, he wrote me a letter, explaining his objections to the match,
and declaring, that he would keep himself concealed until he should
understand that his parents would dispense with his contracting an
engagement that must make him miserable for life, and he prescribed
the form of advertising in a certain newspaper, by which he might be
apprized of our sentiments on this subject.

'You may easily conceive how much we were alarmed and afflicted by this
elopement, which he had made without dropping the least hint to his
companion Charles Wilson, who belonged to the same college.--We resolved
to punish him with the appearance of neglect, in hopes that he would
return of his own accord; but he maintained his purpose till the young
lady chose a partner for herself; then he produced himself, and made his
peace by the mediation of Wilson.--Suppose we should unite our families
by joining him with your niece, who is one of the most lovely creatures
I ever beheld.--My wife is already as fond of her as if she were her own
child, and I have a presentiment that my son will be captivated by her
at first sight.' 'Nothing could be more agreeable to all our family
(said I) than such an alliance; but, my dear friend, candour obliges
me to tell you, that I am afraid Liddy's heart is not wholly
disengaged--there is a cursed obstacle'--'You mean the young stroller
at Gloucester (said he)--You are surprised that I should know this
circumstance; but you will be more surprised when I tell you that
stroller is no other than my son George Dennison--That was the character
he assumed in his eclipse.' 'I am, indeed, astonished and overjoyed
(cried I), and shall be happy beyond expression to see your proposal
take effect.'

He then gave me to understand that the young gentleman, at his emerging
from concealment, had disclosed his passion for Miss Melford, the niece
of Mr Bramble, of Monmouthshire. Though Mr Dennison little dreamed that
this was his old friend Matthew Loyd, he nevertheless furnished his son
with proper credentials, and he had been at Bath, London, and many other
places in quest of us, to make himself and his pretensions known.

The bad success of his enquiry had such an effect upon his spirits, that
immediately at his return he was seized with a dangerous fever, which
overwhelmed his parents with terror and affliction; but he was now
happily recovered, though still weak and disconsolate. My nephew joining
us in our walk, I informed him of these circumstances, with which he
was wonderfully pleased. He declared he would promote the match to the
utmost of his power, and that he longed to embrace young Mr Dennison as
his friend and brother.--Mean while, the father went to desire his wife
to communicate this discovery gradually to Liddy, that her delicate
nerves might not suffer too sudden a shock; and I imparted the
particulars to my sister Tabby, who expressed some surprize, not
altogether unmixed, I believe, with an emotion of envy; for, though
she could have no objection to an alliance at once so honourable and
advantageous, she hesitated in giving her consent on pretence of
the youth and inexperience of the parties: at length, however, she
acquiesced, in consequence of having consulted with captain Lismahago.

Mr Dennison took care to be in the way when his son arrived at the gate,
and, without giving him time or opportunity to make any enquiry about
the strangers, brought him up stairs to be presented to Mr Loyd and his
family--The first person he saw when he entered the room, was Liddy,
who, notwithstanding all her preparation, stood trembling in the utmost
confusion--At sight of this object he was fixed motionless to the floor,
and, gazing at her with the utmost eagerness of astonishment, exclaimed,
'Sacred heaven! what is this!--ha! wherefore--' Here his speech failing,
he stood straining his eyes, in the most emphatic silence 'George (said
his father), this is my friend Mr Loyd.' Roused at this intimation, he
turned and received my salute, when I said, 'Young gentleman, if you had
trusted me with your secret at our last meeting, we should have parted
upon better terms.' Before he could make any answer, Jery came round
and stood before him with open arms.--At first, he started and changed
colour; but after a short pause, he rushed into his embrace, and they
hugged one another as if they had been intimate friends from their
infancy: then he payed his respects to Mrs Tabitha, and advancing to
Liddy, 'Is it possible, (cried he), that my senses do not play me false!
that I see Miss Melford under my father's roof--that I am permitted
to speak to her without giving offence--and that her relations have
honoured me with their countenance and protection.' Liddy blushed,
and trembled, and faltered--'To be sure, sir (said she), it is a very
surprising circumstance--a great--a providential--I really know not what
I say--but I beg you will think I have said what's agreeable.'

Mrs Dennison interposing said, 'Compose yourselves, my dear
children.--Your mutual happiness shall be our peculiar care.' The son
going up to his mother, kissed one hand; my niece bathed the other with
her tears; and the good old lady pressed them both in their turns to
her breast.--The lovers were too much affected to get rid of their
embarrassment for one day; but the scene was much enlivened by the
arrival of Jack Wilson, who brought, as usual, some game of his own
killing--His honest countenance was a good letter of recommendation. I
received him like a dear friend after a long separation; and I could
not help wondering to see him shake Jery by the hand as an old
acquaintance--They had, indeed, been acquainted some days, in
consequence of a diverting incident, which I shall explain at meeting.
That same night a consultation was held upon the concerns of the lovers,
when the match was formally agreed to, and all the marriage articles
were settled without the least dispute.--My nephew and I promised to
make Liddy's fortune five thousand pounds. Mr Dennison declared, he
would make over one half of his estate immediately to his son, and
that his daughter-in-law should be secured in a jointure of four
hundred--Tabby proposed, that, considering their youth, they should
undergo one year at least, of probation before the indissoluble knot
should be tied; but the young gentleman being very impatient and
importunate, and the scheme implying that the young couple should live
in the house, under the wings of his parents, we resolved to make them
happy without further delay.

As the law requires that the parties should be some weeks resident
in the parish, we shall stay here till the ceremony is performed.--Mr
Lismahago requests that he may take the benefit of the same occasion; so
that next Sunday the banns will be published for all four together.--I
doubt I shall not be able to pass my Christmas with you at
Brambleton-hall.--Indeed, I am so agreeably situated in this place, that
I have no desire to shift my quarters; and I foresee, that when the day
of separation comes, there will be abundance of sorrow on all sides.--In
the mean time, we must make the most of those blessings which Heaven
bestows.--Considering how you are tethered by your profession, I cannot
hope to see you so far from home; yet the distance does not exceed a
summer-day's journey, and Charles Dennison, who desires to be remembered
to you, would be rejoiced to see his old compotator; but as I am now
stationary, I expect regular answers to the epistles of

Yours invariably, MATT. BRAMBLE Oct. 11.




To Sir WATKIN PHILLIPS, Bart. at Oxon.

DEAR WAT,

Every day is now big with incident and discovery--Young Mr Dennison
proves to be no other than that identical person whom I have execrated
so long, under the name of Wilson--He had eloped from college at
Cambridge, to avoid a match that he detested, and acted in different
parts of the country as a stroller, until the lady in question made
choice of a husband for herself; then he returned to his father, and
disclosed his passion for Liddy, which met with the approbation of his
parents, though the father little imagined that Mr Bramble was his old
companion Matthew Loyd. The young gentleman, being impowered to make
honourable proposals to my uncle and me, had been in search of us all
over England, without effect; and he it was whom I had seen pass on
horseback by the window of the inn, where I stood with my sister, but
he little dreamed that we were in the house--As for the real Mr Wilson,
whom I called forth to combat, by mistake, he is the neighbour and
intimate friend of old Mr Dennison, and this connexion had suggested to
the son the idea of taking that name while he remained in obscurity.

You may easily conceive what pleasure I must have felt on discovering
that the honour of our family was in no danger from the conduct of a
sister whom I love with uncommon affection; that, instead of debasing
her sentiments and views to a wretched stroller, she had really
captivated the heart of a gentleman, her equal in rank and superior in
fortune; and that, as his parents approved of his attachment, I was on
the eve of acquiring a brother-in-law so worthy of my friendship and
esteem. George Dennison is, without all question, one of the most
accomplished young fellows in England. His person is at once elegant
and manly, and his understanding highly cultivated. Tho' his spirit
is lofty, his heart is kind; and his manner so engaging, as to command
veneration and love, even from malice and indifference. When I weigh
my own character with his, I am ashamed to find myself so light in the
balance; but the comparison excites no envy--I propose him as a model
for imitation--I have endeavoured to recommend myself to his friendship,
and hope I have already found a place in his affection. I am, however,
mortified to reflect what flagrant injustice we every day commit, and
what absurd judgment we form, in viewing objects through the falsifying
mediums of prejudice and passion. Had you asked me a few days ago, the
picture of Wilson the player, I should have drawn a portrait very unlike
the real person and character of George Dennison. Without all doubt, the
greatest advantage acquired in travelling and perusing mankind in the
original, is that of dispelling those shameful clouds that darken the
faculties of the mind, preventing it from judging with candour and
precision.

The real Wilson is a great original, and the best tempered,
companionable man I ever knew--I question if ever he was angry or
low-spirited in his life. He makes no pretensions to letters; but he is
an adept in every thing else that can be either useful or entertaining.
Among other qualifications, he is a complete sportsman, and counted the
best shot in the county. He and Dennison, and Lismahago and I, attended
by Clinker, went a-shooting yesterday, and made a great havock among the
partridges--To-morrow we shall take the field against the woodcocks and
snipes. In the evening we dance and sing, or play at commerce, loo, and
quadrille.

Mr Dennison is an elegant poet, and has written some detached pieces on
the subject of his passion for Liddy, which must be very flattering
to the vanity of a young woman--Perhaps he is one of the greatest
theatrical geniuses that ever appeared. He sometimes entertains us with
reciting favourite speeches from our best plays. We are resolved to
convert the great hall into a theatre, and get up the Beaux Stratagem
without delay--I think I shall make no contemptible figure in the
character of Scrub; and Lismahago will be very great in Captain Gibbet.
Wilson undertakes to entertain the country people with Harlequin
Skeleton, for which he has got a jacket ready painted with his own hand.

Our society is really enchanting. Even the severity of Lismahago
relaxes, and the vinegar of Mrs Tabby is remarkably dulcified, ever
since it was agreed that she should take precedency of her niece in
being first noosed: for, you must know, the day is fixed for Liddy's
marriage; and the banns for both couples have been already once
published in the parish church. The Captain earnestly begged that
one trouble might serve for all, and Tabitha assented with a vile
affectation of reluctance. Her inamorato, who came hither very slenderly
equipt, has sent for his baggage to London, which, in all probability,
will not arrive in time for the wedding; but it is of no great
consequence, as every thing is to be transacted with the utmost
privacy--Meanwhile, directions are given for making out the contracts
of marriage, which are very favourable for both females; Liddy will be
secured in a good jointure; and her aunt will remain mistress of her own
fortune, except one half of the interest, which her husband shall have
a right to enjoy for his natural life: I think this is as little in
conscience as can be done for a man who yokes with such a partner for
life.

These expectants seem to be so happy, that if Mr Dennison had an
agreeable daughter, I believe I should be for making the third couple
in this country dance. The humour seems to be infectious; for Clinker,
alias Loyd, has a month's mind to play the fool, in the same fashion,
with Mrs Winifred Jenkins. He has even sounded me on the subject; but I
have given him no encouragement to prosecute this scheme--I told him
I thought he might do better, as there was no engagement nor promise
subsisting; that I did not know what designs my uncle might have formed
for his advantage; but I was of opinion, that he should not, at present,
run the risque of disobliging him by any premature application of this
nature--Honest Humphry protested he would suffer death sooner than do or
say any thing that should give offence to the 'squire: but he owned he
had a kindness for the young woman, and had reason to think she
looked upon him with a favourable eye; that he considered this mutual
manifestation of good will, as an engagement understood, which ought to
be binding to the conscience of an honest man; and he hoped the 'squire
and I would be of the same opinion, when we should be at leisure to
bestow any thought about the matter--I believe he is in the right; and
we shall find time to take his case into consideration--You see we are
fixed for some weeks at least, and as you have had a long respite, I
hope you will begin immediately to discharge the arrears due to

Your affectionate, J. MELFORD Oct. 14.




To Miss LAETITIA WILLIS, at Gloucester.

MY DEAR, DEAR LETTY,

Never did I sit down to write in such agitation as I now feel--In
the course of a few days, we have met with a number of incidents so
wonderful and interesting, that all my ideas are thrown into confusion
and perplexity--You must not expect either method or coherence in what
I am going to relate--my dearest Willis. Since my last, the aspect of
affairs is totally changed!--and so changed! but I would fain give you
a regular detail--In passing a river about eight days ago, our coach was
overturned, and some of us narrowly escaped with life--My uncle had well
nigh perished. O Heaven, I cannot reflect upon that circumstance without
horror--I should have lost my best friend, my father and protector, but
for the resolution and activity of his servant Humphry Clinker, whom
Providence really seems to have placed near him for the necessity of
this occasion.--I would not be thought superstitious; but surely he
acted from a stronger impulse than common fidelity. Was it not the
voice of nature that loudly called upon him to save the life of his
own father? for, 0 Letty, it was discovered that Humphry Clinker was my
uncle's natural son.

Almost at the same instant, a gentleman, who came to offer us his
assistance, and invite us to his house, turned out to be a very old
friend of Mr Bramble.--His name is Mr Dennison, one of the worthiest men
living; and his lady is a perfect saint upon earth. They have an only
son--who do you think is this only son?--O Letty!--O gracious heaven!
how my heart palpitates, when I tell you that this only son of Mr
Dennison's, is that very identical youth who, under the name of Wilson,
has made such ravage in my heart!--Yes, my dear friend! Wilson and I are
now lodged in the same house, and converse together freely--His father
approves of his sentiments in my favour; his mother loves me with all
the tenderness of a parent; my uncle, my aunt and my brother, no longer
oppose my inclinations--On the contrary, they have agreed to make us
happy without delay; and in three weeks or a month, if no unforeseen
accident intervenes, your friend Lydia Melford, will have changed her
name and condition--I say, if no accident intervenes, because such a
torrent of success makes me tremble!--I wish there may not be something
treacherous in this sudden reconciliation of fortune--I have no merit--I
have no title to such felicity. Far from enjoying the prospect that
lies before me, my mind is harrassed with a continued tumult, made up of
hopes and wishes, doubts and apprehensions--I can neither eat nor sleep,
and my spirits are in perpetual flutter.--I more than ever feel that
vacancy in my heart, which your presence alone can fill.--The mind, in
every disquiet, seeks to repose itself on the bosom of a friend; and
this is such a trial as I really know not how to support without your
company and counsel--I must, therefore, dear Letty, put your friendship
to the test--I must beg you will come and do the last offices of
maidenhood to your companion Lydia Melford.

This letter goes inclosed in one to our worthy governess, from Mrs
Dennison, entreating her to interpose with your mamma, that you may be
allowed to favour us with your company on this occasion; and I flatter
myself that no material objection can be made to our request. The
distance from hence to Gloucester, does not exceed one hundred miles,
and the roads are good.--Mr Clinker, alias Loyd, shall be sent over to
attend your motions--If you step into the post-chaise, with your maid
Betty Barker, at seven in the morning, you will arrive by four in the
afternoon at the half-way house, where there is good accommodation.
There you shall be met by my brother and myself, who will next day
conduct you to this place, where, I am sure, you will find yourself
perfectly at your case in the midst of an agreeable society.--Dear
Letty, I will take no refusal--if you have any friendship--any
humanity--you will come.--I desire that immediate application may be
made to your mamma; and that the moment her permission is obtained, you
will apprise

Your ever faithful, LYDIA MELFORD Oct. 14.




To Mrs JERMYN, at her house in Gloucester.

DEAR MADAM,

Though I was not so fortunate as to be favoured with an answer to the
letter with which I troubled you in the spring, I still flatter myself
that you retain some regard for me and my concerns. I am sure the care
and tenderness with which I was treated, under your roof and tuition,
demand the warmest returns of gratitude and affection on my part, and
these sentiments, I hope, I shall cherish to my dying day--At present,
I think it my duty to make you acquainted with the happy issue of that
indiscretion by which I incurred your displeasure.--Ah! madam, the
slighted Wilson is metamorphosed into George Dennison, only son and heir
of a gentleman, whose character is second to none in England, as you may
understand upon inquiry. My guardian, my brother and I, are now in his
house; and an immediate union of the two families is to take place in
the persons of the young gentleman and your poor Lydia Melford.--You
will easily conceive how embarrassing this situation must be to a young
inexperienced creature like me, of weak nerves and strong apprehensions;
and how much the presence of a friend and confidant would encourage and
support me on this occasion. You know, that of all the young ladies,
Miss Willis was she that possessed the greatest share of my confidence
and affection; and, therefore, I fervently wish to have the happiness of
her company at this interesting crisis.

Mrs Dennison, who is the object of universal love and esteem, has, at
my request, written to you on this subject, and I now beg leave to
reinforce her sollicitations.--My dear Mrs Jermyn! my ever honoured
governess! let me conjure you by that fondness which once distinguished
your favourite Lydia! by that benevolence of heart, which disposes you
to promote the happiness of your fellow-creatures in general! lend
a favourable ear to my petition, and use your influence with Letty's
mamma, that my most earnest desire may be gratified. Should I be
indulged in this particular, I will engage to return her safe, and even
to accompany her to Gloucester, where, if you will give me leave, I will
present to you, under another name,

Dear Madam, Your most affectionate Humble servant, And penitent, LYDIA
MELFORD Oct. 14.




To Mrs MARY JONES, at Brambleton-hall.

O MARY JONES! MARY JONES!

I have met with so many axidents, suprisals, and terrifications, that
I am in a pafeck fantigo, and I believe I shall never be my own self
again. Last week I was dragged out of a river like a drowned rat, and
lost a bran-new night-cap, with a sulfer stayhook, that cost me a good
half-a-crown, and an odd shoe of green gallow monkey; besides wetting my
cloaths and taring my smuck, and an ugly gash made in the back part of
my thy, by the stump of a tree--To be sure Mr Clinker tuck me out of the
cox; but he left me on my back in the water, to go to the 'squire; and I
mought have had a watry grave, if a millar had not brought me to the dry
land--But, O! what choppings and changes girl--The player man that came
after Miss Liddy, and frightened me with a beard at Bristol Well, is now
matthew-murphy'd into a fine young gentleman, son and hare of 'squire
Dollison--We are all together in the same house, and all parties have
agreed to the match, and in a fortnite the surrymony will be performed.

But this is not the only wedding we are to have--Mistriss is resolved
to have the same frolick, in the naam of God! Last Sunday in the parish
crutch, if my own ars may be trusted, the clerk called the banes of
marridge betwixt Opaniah Lashmeheygo, and Tapitha Brample, spinster; he
mought as well have called her inkle-weaver, for she never spun and hank
of yarn in her life--Young 'squire Dollison and Miss Liddy make the
second kipple; and there might have been a turd, but times are changed
with Mr Clinker--O Molly! what do'st think? Mr Clinker is found to be a
pye-blow of our own 'squire, and his rite naam is Mr Matthew Loyd (thof
God he nose how that can be); and he is now out of livery, and wares
ruffles--but I new him when he was out at elbows, and had not a rag to
kiver his pistereroes; so he need not hold his head so high--He is for
sartin very umble and compleasant, and purtests as how he has the same
regard as before; but that he is no longer his own master, and cannot
portend to marry without the 'squire's consent--He says he must wait
with patience, and trust to Providence, and such nonsense--But if so be
as how his regard be the same, why stand shilly shally? Why not strike
while the iron is hot, and speak to the 'squire without loss of time?
What subjection can the 'squire make to our coming together--Thof my
father wan't a gentleman, my mother was an honest woman--I didn't come
on the wrong side of the blanket, girl--My parents were marred according
to the right of holy mother crutch, in the face of men and angles--Mark
that, Mary Jones.

Mr Clinker (Loyd I would say) had best look to his tackle. There be
other chaps in the market, as the saying is--What would he say if I
should except the soot and sarvice of the young squire's valley? Mr
Machappy is a gentleman born, and has been abroad in the wars--He has a
world of buck larning, and speaks French, and Ditch, and Scotch, and all
manner of outlandish lingos; to be sure he's a little the worse for the
ware, and is much given to drink; but then he's good-tempered in his
liquor, and a prudent woman mought wind him about her finger--But I have
no thoughts of him, I'll assure you--I scorn for to do, or to say, or
to think any thing that mought give unbreech to Mr Loyd, without furder
occasion--But then I have such vapours, Molly I sit and cry by myself,
and take ass of etida, and smill to burnt fathers, and kindal-snuffs;
and I pray constantly for grease, that I may have a glimpse of the
new-light, to shew me the way through this wretched veil of tares. And
yet, I want for nothing in this family of love, where every sole is so
kind and so courteous, that wan would think they are so many saints in
haven. Dear Molly, I recommend myself to your prayers, being, with my
sarvice to Saul,

your ever loving, and discounselled friend, WIN. JENKINS Oct. 14.




To Dr LEWIS.

DEAR DICK,

You cannot imagine what pleasure I have in seeing your hand-writing,
after such a long cessation on your side of our correspondence--Yet,
Heaven knows, I have often seen your hand-writing with disgust--I mean,
when it appeared in abbreviations of apothecary's Latin--I like your
hint of making interest for the reversion of the collector's place, for
Mr Lismahago, who is much pleased with the scheme, and presents you
with his compliments and best thanks for thinking so kindly of his
concerns--The man seems to mend, upon further acquaintance. That harsh
reserve, which formed a disagreeable husk about his character, begins to
peel off in the course of our communication--I have great hopes that
he and Tabby will be as happily paired as any two draught animals in
the kingdom; and I make no doubt but that he will prove a valuable
acquisition to our little society, in the article of conversation, by
the fire-side in winter.

Your objection to my passing this season of the year at such a distance
from home, would have more weight if I did not find myself perfectly at
my ease where I am; and my health so much improved, that I am disposed
to bid defiance to gout and rheumatism--I begin to think I have put
myself on the superannuated list too soon, and absurdly sought
for health in the retreats of laziness--I am persuaded that all
valetudinarians are too sedentary, too regular, and too cautious--We
should sometimes increase the motion of the machine, to unclog the
wheels of life; and now and then take a plunge amidst the waves of
excess, in order to caseharden the constitution. I have even found a
change of company as necessary as a change of air, to promote a vigorous
circulation of the spirits, which is the very essence and criterion of
good health.

Since my last, I have been performing the duties of friendship, that
required a great deal of exercise, from which I hope to derive some
benefit--Understanding, by the greatest accident in the world, that
Mr Baynard's wife was dangerously ill of a pleuritic fever, I borrowed
Dennison's post-chaise, and went across the country to his habitation,
attended only by Loyd (quondam Clinker) on horseback.--As the distance
is not above thirty miles, I arrived about four in the afternoon, and
meeting the physician at the door, was informed that his patient had
just expired.--I was instantly seized with a violent emotion, but it
was not grief.--The family being in confusion, I ran up stairs into
the chamber, where, indeed, they were all assembled.--The aunt stood
wringing her hands in a kind of stupefaction of sorrow, but my friend
acted all the extravagancies of affliction--He held the body in his
arms, and poured forth such a lamentation, that one would have thought
he had lost the most amiable consort and valuable companion upon earth.

Affection may certainly exist independent of esteem; nay, the same
object may be lovely in one respect, and detestable in another--The mind
has a surprising faculty of accommodating, and even attaching itself,
in such a manner, by dint of use, to things that are in their own nature
disagreeable, and even pernicious, that it cannot bear to be delivered
from them without reluctance and regret. Baynard was so absorbed in his
delirium, that he did not perceive me when I entered, and desired one of
the women to conduct the aunt into her own chamber.--At the same time I
begged the tutor to withdraw the boy, who stood gaping in a corner,
very little affected with the distress of the scene.--These steps being
taken, I waited till the first violence of my friend's transport was
abated, then disengaged him gently from the melancholy object, and led
him by the hand into another apartment; though he struggled so hard,
that I was obliged to have recourse to the assistance of his valet de
chambre--In a few minutes, however, he recollected himself, and folding
me in his arms, 'This (cried he), is a friendly office, indeed!--I know
not how you came hither; but, I think, Heaven sent you to prevent my
going distracted--O Matthew! I have lost my dear Harriet!--my poor,
gentle, tender creature, that loved me with such warmth and purity of
affection--my constant companion of twenty years! She's gone--she's gone
for ever!--Heaven and earth! where is she?--Death shall not part us!'

So saying, he started up, and could hardly be with-held from returning
to the scene we had quitted--You will perceive it would have been very
absurd for me to argue with a man that talked so madly.--On all such
occasions, the first torrent of passion must be allowed to subside
gradually.--I endeavoured to beguile his attention by starting little
hints and insinuating other objects of discourse imperceptibly; and
being exceedingly pleased in my own mind at this event, I exerted
myself with such an extraordinary flow of spirits as was attended with
success.--In a few hours, he was calm enough to hear reason, and even to
own that Heaven could not have interposed more effectually to rescue
him from disgrace and ruin.--That he might not, however, relapse into
weaknesses for want of company, I passed the night in his chamber, in a
little tent bed brought thither on purpose; and well it was I took
this precaution, for he started up in bed several times, and would have
played the fool, if I had not been present.

Next day he was in a condition to talk of business, and vested me with
full authority over his household, which I began to exercise without
loss of time, tho' not before he knew and approved of the scheme I
had projected for his advantage.--He would have quitted the house
immediately; but this retreat I opposed.--Far from encouraging a
temporary disgust, which might degenerate into an habitual aversion,
I resolved, if possible, to attach him more than ever to his Houshold
Gods.--I gave directions for the funeral to be as private as was
consistant with decency; I wrote to London, that an inventory and
estimate might be made of the furniture and effects in his town-house,
and gave notice to the landlord, that Mr Baynard should quit the
premises at Lady-day; I set a person at work to take account of every
thing in the country-house, including horses, carriages, and harness; I
settled the young gentleman at a boarding-school, kept by a clergyman in
the neighbourhood, and thither he went without reluctance, as soon as
he knew that he was to be troubled no more with his tutor, whom we
dismissed. The aunt continued very sullen, and never appeared at
table, though Mr Baynard payed his respects to her every day in her
own chamber; there also she held conferences with the waiting-women and
other servants of the family: but, the moment her niece was interred,
she went away in a post-chaise prepared for that purpose: she did not
leave the house, however, without giving Mr Baynard to understand, that
the wardrobe of her niece was the perquisite of her woman; accordingly
that worthless drab received all the clothes, laces, and linen of her
deceased mistress, to the value of five hundred pounds, at a moderate
computation.

The next step I took was to disband that legion of supernumerary
domestics, who had preyed so long upon the vitals of my friend:, a
parcel of idle drones, so intolerably insolent, that they even treated
their own master with the most contemptuous neglect. They had been
generally hired by his wife, according to the recommendation of her
woman, and these were the only patrons to whom they payed the least
deference. I had therefore uncommon satisfaction in clearing the house
of these vermin. The woman of the deceased, and a chambermaid, a valet
de chambre, a butler, a French cook, a master gardener, two footmen and
a coachman, I payed off, and turned out of the house immediately, paying
to each a month's wages in lieu of warning. Those whom I retained,
consisted of the female cook, who had been assistant to the Frenchman,
a house maid, an old lacquey, a postilion, and under-gardener. Thus I
removed at once a huge mountain of expence and care from the shoulders
of my friend, who could hardly believe the evidence of his own senses,
when he found himself so suddenly and so effectually relieved. His
heart, however, was still subject to vibrations of tenderness,
which returned at certain intervals, extorting sighs, and tears, and
exclamations of grief and impatience: but these fits grew every day
less violent and less frequent, 'till at length his reason obtained a
complete victory over the infirmities of his nature.

Upon an accurate enquiry into the state of his affairs, I find his debts
amount to twenty thousand pounds, for eighteen thousand pounds of which
sum his estate is mortgaged; and as he pays five per cent. interest, and
some of his farms are unoccupied, he does not receive above two hundred
pounds a year clear from his lands, over and above the interest of
his wife's fortune, which produced eight hundred pounds annually. For
lightening this heavy burthen, I devised the following expedient. His
wife's jewels, together with his superfluous plate and furniture in both
houses, his horses and carriages, which are already advertised to be
sold by auction, will, according to the estimate, produce two thousand
five hundred pounds in ready money, with which the debt will be
immediately reduced to eighteen thousand pounds--I have undertaken to
find him ten thousand pounds at four per cent. by which means he will
save one hundred a-year in the article of interest, and perhaps we shall
be able to borrow the other eight thousand on the same terms. According
to his own scheme of a country life, he says he can live comfortably for
three hundred pounds a-year; but, as he has a son to educate, we will
allow him five hundred; then there will be an accumulating fund of seven
hundred a-year, principal and interest, to pay off the incumbrance;
and, I think, we may modestly add three hundred, on the presumption
of new-leasing and improving the vacant farms: so that, in a couple of
years, I suppose there will be above a thousand a-year appropriated to
liquidate a debt of sixteen thousand.

We forthwith began to class and set apart the articles designed for
sale, under the direction of an upholder from London; and, that nobody
in the house might be idle, commenced our reformation without doors,
as well as within. With Baynard's good leave, I ordered the gardener to
turn the rivulet into its old channel, to refresh the fainting Naiads,
who had so long languished among mouldring roots, withered leaves, and
dry pebbles--The shrubbery is condemned to extirpation; and the
pleasure ground will be restored to its original use of corn-field and
pasture--Orders are given for rebuilding the walls of the garden at the
back of the house, and for planting clumps of firs, intermingled with
beech and chestnut, at the east end, which is now quite exposed to the
surly blasts that come from that quarter. All these works being actually
begun, and the house and auction left to the care and management of a
reputable attorney, I brought Baynard along with me in the chaise, and
made him acquainted with Dennison, whose goodness of heart would not
fail to engage his esteem and affection.--He is indeed charmed with our
society in general, and declares that he never saw the theory of true
pleasure reduced to practice before. I really believe it would not be an
easy task to find such a number of individuals assembled under one roof,
more happy than we are at present.

I must tell you, however, in confidence, I suspect Tabby of
tergiversation.--I have been so long accustomed to that original, that
I know all the caprices of her heart, and can often perceive her designs
while they are yet in embrio--She attached herself to Lismahago for no
other reason but that she despaired of making a more agreeable conquest.
At present, if I am not much mistaken in my observation, she would
gladly convert the widowhood of Baynard to her own advantage.--Since
he arrived, she has behaved very coldly to the captain, and strove to
fasten on the other's heart, with the hooks of overstrained civility.
These must be the instinctive efforts of her constitution, rather than
the effects of any deliberate design; for matters are carried to such a
length with the lieutenant, that she could not retract with any regard
to conscience or reputation. Besides, she will meet with nothing but
indifference or aversion on the side of Baynard, who has too much sense
to think of such a partner at any time, and too much delicacy to admit a
thought of any such connexion at the present juncture--Meanwhile, I have
prevailed upon her to let him have four thousand pounds at four per cent
towards paying off his mortage. Young Dennison has agreed that
Liddy's fortune shall be appropriated to the same purpose, on the same
terms.--His father will sell out three thousand pounds stock for his
accommodation.--Farmer Bland has, at the desire of Wilson, undertaken
for two thousand; and I must make an effort to advance what further will
be required to take my friend out of the hands of the Philistines. He
is so pleased with the improvements made on his estate, which is all
cultivated like a garden, that he has entered himself as a pupil in
farming to Mr Dennison, and resolved to attach himself wholly to the
practice of husbandry.

Every thing is now prepared for our double wedding. The
marriage-articles for both couples are drawn and executed; and the
ceremony only waits until the parties shall have been resident in the
parish the term prescribed by law. Young Dennison betrays some symptoms
of impatience; but, Lismahago bears this necessary delay with the temper
of a philosopher.--You must know, the captain does not stand altogether
on the foundation of personal merit. Besides his half-pay, amounting to
two and forty pounds a year, this indefatigable oeconomist has amassed
eight hundred pounds, which he has secured in the funds. This sum arises
partly from his pay's running up while he remained among the Indians;
partly from what he received as a consideration for the difference
between his full appointment and the half-pay, to which he is now
restricted; and partly from the profits of a little traffick he drove in
peltry, during his sachemship among the Miamis.

Liddy's fears and perplexities have been much assuaged by the company
of one Miss Willis, who had been her intimate companion at the
boarding-school. Her parents had been earnestly sollicited to allow her
making this friendly visit on such an extraordinary occasion; and two
days ago she arrived with her mother, who did not chuse that she should
come without a proper gouvernante. The young lady is very sprightly,
handsome, and agreeable, and the mother a mighty good sort of a woman;
so that their coming adds considerably to our enjoyment. But we shall
have a third couple yoked in the matrimonial chain. Mr Clinker Loyd has
made humble remonstrance through the canal of my nephew, setting forth
the sincere love and affection mutually subsisting between him and Mrs
Winifred Jenkins, and praying my consent to their coming together for
life. I would have wished that Mr Clinker had kept out of this scrape;
but as the nymph's happiness is at stake, and she has already some
fits in the way of despondence, I, in order to prevent any tragical
catastrophe, have given him leave to play the fool, in imitation of
his betters; and I suppose we shall in time have a whole litter of his
progeny at Brambleton-hall. The fellow is stout and lusty, very sober
and conscientious; and the wench seems to be as great an enthusiast in
love as in religion.

I wish you would think of employing him some other way, that the
parish may not be overstocked--you know he has been bred a farrier,
consequently belongs to the faculty; and as he is very docile, I make
no doubt but, with your good instruction, he may be, in a little time,
qualified to act as a Welch apothecary. Tabby, who never did a favour
with a good grace, has consented, with great reluctance, to this match.
Perhaps it hurts her pride, as she now considers Clinker in the light of
a relation; but, I believe, her objections are of a more selfish nature.
She declares she cannot think of retaining the wife of Matthew Loyd in
the character of a servant; and she foresees, that on such an occasion
the woman will expect some gratification for her past services. As for
Clinker, exclusive of other considerations, he is so trusty, brave,
affectionate, and alert, and I owe him such personal obligations, that
he merits more than all the indulgence that can possibly be shewn him,
by

Yours, MATT. BRAMBLE Oct. 26.




To Sir WATKIN PHILLIPS, Bart. at Oxon.

DEAR KNIGHT,

The fatal knots are now tied. The comedy is near a close; and the
curtain is ready to drop: but, the latter scenes of this act I shall
recapitulate in order--About a fortnight ago, my uncle made an excursion
across the country, and brought hither a particular friend, one Mr
Baynard, who has just lost his wife, and was for some time disconsolate,
though by all accounts he had much more cause for joy than for sorrow at
this event.--His countenance, however, clears up apace; and he appears
to be a person of rare accomplishments.--But, we have received another
still more agreeable reinforcement to our company, by the arrival
of Miss Willis from Gloucester. She was Liddy's bosom friend at the
boarding-school, and being earnestly sollicited to assist at the
nuptials, her mother was so obliging as to grant my sister's request,
and even to come with her in person. Liddy, accompanied by George
Dennison and me, gave them the meeting halfway, and next day conducted
them hither in safety. Miss Willis is a charming girl, and, in point of
disposition, an agreeable contrast to my sister, who is rather too grave
and sentimental for my turn of mind. The other is gay, frank, a little
giddy, and always good-humoured. She has, moreover, a genteel fortune,
is well born, and remarkably handsome. Ah Phillips! if these qualities
were permanent--if her humour would never change, nor her beauties
decay, what efforts would I not make--But these are idle reflections--my
destiny must one day be fulfilled.

At present we pass the time as agreeably as we can.--We have got up
several farces, which afforded unspeakable entertainment by the effects
they produced among the country people, who are admitted to all our
exhibitions.--Two nights ago, Jack Wilson acquired great applause in
Harlequin Skeleton, and Lismahago surprised us all in the character
of Pierot.--His long lank sides, and strong marked features, were all
peculiarly adapted to his part.--He appeared with a ludicrous stare,
from which he had discharged all meaning: he adopted the impressions of
fear and amazement so naturally, that many of the audience were infected
by his looks; but when the skeleton held him in chace his horror
became most divertingly picturesque, and seemed to endow him with such
praeternatural agility as confounded all the spectators. It was a lively
representation of Death in pursuit of Consumption, and had such an
effect upon the commonalty, that some of them shrieked aloud, and others
ran out of the hall in the utmost consternation.

This is not the only instance in which the lieutenant has lately
excited our wonder. His temper, which had been soured and shrivelled
by disappointment and chagrin, is now swelled out, and smoothed like
a raisin in plumb-porridge. From being reserved and punctilious, he is
become easy and obliging. He cracks jokes, laughs and banters, with the
most facetious familiarity; and, in a word, enters into all our schemes
of merriment and pastime--The other day his baggage arrived in the
waggon from London, contained in two large trunks and a long deal box
not unlike a coffin. The trunks were filled with his wardrobe, which
he displayed for the entertainment of the company, and he freely owned,
that it consisted chiefly of the opima spolia taken in battle. What he
selected for his wedding suit, was a tarnished white cloth faced with
blue velvet, embroidered with silver; but, he valued himself most upon a
tye-periwig, in which he had made his first appearance as a lawyer above
thirty years ago. This machine had been in buckle ever since, and now
all the servants in the family were employed to frizz it out for the
occasion, which was yesterday celebrated at the parish church. George
Dennison and his bride were distinguished by nothing extraordinary
in their apparel. His eyes lightened with eagerness and joy, and she
trembled with coyness and confusion. My uncle gave her away, and her
friend Willis supported her during the ceremony.

But my aunt and her paramour took the pas, and formed, indeed, such a
pair of originals, as, I believe all England could not parallel. She was
dressed in the stile of 1739; and the day being cold, put on a
manteel of green velvet laced with gold: but this was taken off by the
bridegroom, who threw over her shoulders a fur cloak of American sables,
valued at fourscore guineas, a present equally agreeable and unexpected.
Thus accoutred, she was led up to the altar by Mr Dennison, who did the
office of her father: Lismahago advanced in the military step with
his French coat reaching no farther than the middle of his thigh, his
campaign wig that surpasses all description, and a languishing leer
upon his countenance, in which there seemed to be something arch and
ironical. The ring, which he put upon her finger, he had concealed
till the moment it was used. He now produced it with an air of
self-complacency. It was a curious antique, set with rose diamonds: he
told us afterwards, it had been in the family two hundred years and was
a present from his grand-mother. These circumstances agreeably flattered
the pride of our aunt Tabitha, which had already found uncommon
gratification in the captain's generosity; for he had, in the morning,
presented my uncle with a fine bear's skin, and a Spanish fowling-piece,
and me with a case of pistols curiously mounted with silver. At the same
time he gave Mrs Jenkins an Indian purse, made of silk grass, containing
twenty crown pieces. You must know, this young lady, with the assistance
of Mr Loyd, formed the third couple who yesterday sacrificed to Hymen.
I wrote to you in my last, that he had recourse to my mediation, which I
employed successfully with my uncle; but Mrs Tabitha held out 'till the
love-sick Jenkins had two fits of the mother; then she relented, and
those two cooing turtles were caged for life--Our aunt made an effort of
generosity in furnishing the bride with her superfluities of clothes and
linen, and her example was followed by my sister; nor did Mr Bramble
and I neglect her on this occasion. It was, indeed, a day of
peace-offering.--Mr Dennison insisted upon Liddy's accepting two bank
notes of one hundred pounds each, as pocket-money; and his lady gave her
a diamond necklace of double that value. There was, besides, a mutual
exchange of tokens among the individuals of the two families thus
happily united.

As George Dennison and his partner were judged improper objects of
mirth, Jack Wilson had resolved to execute some jokes on Lismahago, and
after supper began to ply him with bumpers, when the ladies had retired;
but the captain perceiving his drift, begged for quarter, alledging that
the adventure, in which he had engaged, was a very serious matter; and
that it would be more the part of a good Christian to pray that he
might be strengthened, than to impede his endeavours to finish the
adventure.--He was spared accordingly, and permitted to ascend the
nuptial couch with all his senses about him.--There he and his consort
sat in state, like Saturn and Cybele, while the benediction posset was
drank; and a cake being broken over the head of Mrs Tabitha Lismahago,
the fragments were distributed among the bystanders, according to the
custom of the antient Britons, on the supposition that every person who
eat of this hallowed cake, should that night have a vision of the man or
woman whom Heaven designed should be his or her wedded mate.

The weight of Wilson's waggery fell upon honest Humphry and his spouse,
who were bedded in an upper room, with the usual ceremony of throwing
the stocking.--This being performed, and the company withdrawn, a sort
of catterwauling ensued, when Jack found means to introduce a real cat
shod with walnut-shells, which galloping along the boards, made such a
dreadful noise as effectually discomposed our lovers.--Winifred screamed
aloud, and shrunk under the bed-cloaths--Mr Loyd, believing that
Satan was come to buffet him in propria persona, laid aside all carnal
thoughts, and began to pray aloud with great fervency.--At length, the
poor animal, being more afraid than either, leaped into the bed, and
meauled with the most piteous exclamation.--Loyd, thus informed of the
nature of the annoyance, rose and set the door wide open, so that this
troublesome visitant retreated with great expedition; then securing
himself, by means of a double bolt, from a second intrusion, he was left
to enjoy his good fortune without further disturbance.

If one may judge from the looks of the parties, they are all very well
satisfied with what has passed--George Dennison and his wife are
too delicate to exhibit any strong marked signs of their mutual
satisfaction, but their eyes are sufficiently expressive--Mrs Tabitha
Lismahago is rather fulsome in signifying her approbation of the
captain's love; while his deportment is the very pink of gallantry.--He
sighs, and ogles, and languishes at this amiable object; he kisses her
hand, mutters ejaculations of rapture, and sings tender airs; and, no
doubt, laughs internally at her folly in believing him sincere.--In
order to shew how little his vigour was impaired by the fatigues of the
preceding day, he this morning danced a Highland sarabrand over a
naked back-sword, and leaped so high, that I believe he would make no
contemptible figure as a vaulter at Sadler's Wells.--Mr Matthew Loyd,
when asked how he relished his bargain, throws up his eyes, crying,
'For what we have received, Lord make us thankful: amen.'--His helpmate
giggles, and holds her hand before her eyes, affecting to be ashamed
of having been in bed with a man.--Thus all these widgeons enjoy the
novelty of their situation; but, perhaps their notes will be changed,
when they are better acquainted with the nature of the decoy.

As Mrs Willis cannot be persuaded to stay, and Liddy is engaged by
promise to accompany her daughter back to Gloucester, I fancy there will
be a general migration from hence, and that most of us will spend the
Christmas holidays at Bath; in which case, I shall certainly find an
opportunity to beat up your quarters.--By this time, I suppose, you
are sick of alma mater, and even ready to execute that scheme of
peregrination, which was last year concerted between you and

Your affectionate J. MELFORD Nov. 8.




To Dr LEWIS.

DEAR DOCTOR,

My niece Liddy is now happily settled for life; and captain Lismahago
has taken Tabby off my hands; so that I have nothing further to do, but
to comfort my friend Baynard, and provide for my son Loyd, who is also
fairly joined to Mrs Winifred Jenkins. You are an excellent genius at
hints.--Dr Arbuthnot was but a type of Dr Lewis in that respect. What
you observe of the vestry-clerk deserves consideration.--I make no
doubt but Matthew Loyd is well enough qualified for the office; but,
at present, you must find room for him in the house.--His incorruptible
honesty and indefatigable care will be serviceable in superintending
the oeconomy of my farm; tho' I don't mean that he shall interfere with
Barns, of whom I have no cause to complain.--I am just returned with
Baynard, from a second trip to his house, where every thing is regulated
to his satisfaction.--He could not, however, review the apartments
without tears and lamentation, so that he is not yet in a condition to
be left alone; therefore I will not part with him till the spring, when
he intends to plunge into the avocations of husbandry, which will at
once employ and amuse his attention.--Charles Dennison has promised to
stay with him a fortnight, to set him fairly afloat in his improvements;
and Jack Wilson will see him from time to time; besides, he has a few
friends in the country, whom his new plan of life will not exclude from
his society.--In less than a year, I make no doubt, but he will find
himself perfectly at ease both in his mind and body, for the one had
dangerously affected the other; and I shall enjoy the exquisite pleasure
of seeing my friend rescued from misery and contempt.

Mrs Willis being determined to return with her daughter, in a few
days, to Gloucester, our plan has undergone some alteration. Jery has
persuaded his brother-in-law to carry his wife to Bath; and I believe
his parents will accompany him thither.--For my part, I have no
intention to take that route.--It must be something very extraordinary
that will induce me to revisit either Bath or London.--My sister and her
husband, Baynard and I, will take leave of them at Gloucester, and make
the best of our way to Brambleton hall, where I desire you will prepare
a good chine and turkey for our Christmas dinner.--You must also employ
your medical skill in defending me from the attacks of the gout, that I
may be in good case to receive the rest of our company, who promise
to visit us in their return from the Bath.--As I have laid in a
considerable stock of health, it is to be hoped you will not have much
trouble with me in the way of physic, but I intend to work you on
the side of exercise.--I have got an excellent fowling-piece from Mr
Lismahago, who is a keen sportsman, and we shall take the heath in
all weathers.--That this scheme of life may be prosecuted the more
effectually, I intend to renounce all sedentary amusements, particularly
that of writing long letters; a resolution, which, had I taken it
sooner, might have saved you the trouble which you have lately taken in
reading the tedious epistles of

MATT. BRAMBLE NOV. 20.




To Mrs GWYLLIM, at Brambleton-hall.

GOOD MRS GWYLLIM,

Heaven, for wise porpuses, hath ordained that I should change my name
and citation in life, so that I am not to be considered any more
as manager of my brother's family; but as I cannot surrender up my
stewardship till I have settled with you and Williams, I desire you will
get your accunts ready for inspection, as we are coming home without
further delay.--My spouse, the captain, being subject to rummaticks, I
beg you will take great care to have the blew chamber, up two pair of
stairs, well warmed for his reception.--Let the sashes be secured, the
crevices stopt, the carpets laid, and the beds well tousled.--Mrs Loyd,
late Jenkins, being married to a relation of the family, cannot remain
in the capacity of a sarvant; therefore, I wish you would cast about for
some creditable body to be with me in her room--If she can spin, and
is mistress of plain-work, so much the better--but she must not expect
extravagant wages--having a family of my own, I must be more occumenical
than ever. No more at present, but rests

Your loving friend, TAB. LISMAHAGO NOV. 20.




To Mrs MARY JONES, at Brambleton-hall.

MRS JONES,

Providinch hath bin pleased to make great halteration in the pasture
of our affairs.--We were yesterday three kiple chined, by the grease of
God, in the holy bands of mattermoney, and I now subscrive myself Loyd
at your sarvice.--All the parish allowed that young 'squire Dallison and
his bride was a comely pear for to see.--As for madam Lashtniheygo, you
nose her picklearities--her head, to be sure, was fintastical; and her
spouse had rapt her with a long marokin furze cloak from the land of the
selvidges, thof they say it is of immense bally.--The captain himself
had a huge hassock of air, with three tails, and a tum-tawdry coat,
boddered with sulfur.--Wan said he was a monkey-bank; and the ould
bottler swore he was the born imich of Titidall.--For my part, I says
nothing, being as how the captain has done the handsome thing by me.--Mr
Loyd was dressed in a lite frog, and checket with gould binding; and
thof he don't enter in caparison with great folks of quality, yet he has
got as good blood in his veins as arrow privat 'squire in the county;
and then his pursing is far from contentible.--Your humble sarvant had
on a plain pea-green tabby sack, with my Runnela cap, ruff toupee, and
side curls.--They said, I was the very moral of lady Rickmanstone, but
not so pale--that may well be, for her ladyship is my elder by seven
good years and more.--Now, Mrs Mary, our satiety is to suppurate--Mr
Millfart goes to Bath along with the Dallisons, and the rest of us
push home to Wales, to pass our Chrishmarsh at Brampleton-hall--As our
apartments is to be the yallow pepper, in the thurd story, pray carry my
things thither.--Present my cumpliments to Mrs Gwyllim, and I hope
she and I will live upon dissent terms of civility.--Being, by God's
blessing, removed to a higher spear, you'll excuse my being familiar
with the lower sarvants of the family; but, as I trust you'll behave
respectful, and keep a proper distance, you may always depend upon the
good will and purtection of

Yours, W. LOYD Nov. 20.

FINIS.








*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE EXPEDITION OF HUMPHRY CLINKER ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


﻿The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Adventures of Roderick Random
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Adventures of Roderick Random

Author: T. Smollett

Release date: May 1, 2003 [eBook #4085]
                Most recently updated: August 5, 2021

Language: English

Credits: Tapio Riikonen and David Widger


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ADVENTURES OF RODERICK RANDOM ***




The Adventures of Roderick Random

by Tobias Smollett


Contents

 THE AUTHOR’S PREFACE
 APOLOGUE
 CHAPTER I.
 CHAPTER II.
 CHAPTER III.
 CHAPTER IV.
 CHAPTER V.
 CHAPTER VI.
 CHAPTER VII.
 CHAPTER VIII.
 CHAPTER IX.
 CHAPTER X.
 CHAPTER XI.
 CHAPTER XII.
 CHAPTER XIII.
 CHAPTER XIV.
 CHAPTER XV.
 CHAPTER XVI.
 CHAPTER XVII.
 CHAPTER XVIII.
 CHAPTER XIX.
 CHAPTER XX.
 CHAPTER XXI.
 CHAPTER XXII.
 CHAPTER XXIII.
 CHAPTER XXIV.
 CHAPTER XXV.
 CHAPTER XXVI.
 CHAPTER XXVII.
 CHAPTER XXVIII.
 CHAPTER XXIX.
 CHAPTER XXX.
 CHAPTER XXXI.
 CHAPTER XXXII.
 CHAPTER XXXIII.
 CHAPTER XXXIV.
 CHAPTER XXXV.
 CHAPTER XXXVI.
 CHAPTER XXXVII.
 CHAPTER XXXVIII.
 CHAPTER XXXIX.
 CHAPTER XL.
 CHAPTER XLI.
 CHAPTER XLII.
 CHAPTER XLIII.
 CHAPTER XLIV.
 CHAPTER XLV.
 CHAPTER XLVI.
 CHAPTER XLVII.
 CHAPTER XLVIII.
 CHAPTER XLIX.
 CHAPTER L.
 CHAPTER LI.
 CHAPTER LII.
 CHAPTER LIII.
 CHAPTER LIV.
 CHAPTER LV.
 CHAPTER LVI.
 CHAPTER LVII.
 CHAPTER LVIII.
 CHAPTER LIX.
 CHAPTER LX.
 CHAPTER LXI.
 CHAPTER LXII.
 CHAPTER LXIII.
 CHAPTER LXIV.
 CHAPTER LXV.
 CHAPTER LXVI.
 CHAPTER LXVII.
 CHAPTER LXVIII.
 CHAPTER LXIX.




THE AUTHOR’S PREFACE


Of all kinds of satire, there is none so entertaining and universally
improving, as that which is introduced, as it were occasionally, in the
course of an interesting story, which brings every incident home to
life, and by representing familiar scenes in an uncommon and amusing
point of view, invests them with all the graces of novelty, while
nature is appealed to in every particular. The reader gratifies his
curiosity in pursuing the adventures of a person in whose favour he is
prepossessed; he espouses his cause, he sympathises with him in his
distress, his indignation is heated against the authors of his
calamity: the humane passions are inflamed; the contrast between
dejected virtue and insulting vice appears with greater aggravation,
and every impression having a double force on the imagination, the
memory retains the circumstance, and the heart improves by the example.
The attention is not tired with a bare catalogue of characters, but
agreeably diverted with all the variety of invention; and the
vicissitudes of life appear in their peculiar circumstances, opening an
ample field for wit and humour.

Romance, no doubt, owes its origin to ignorance, vanity, and
superstition. In the dark ages of the World, when a man had rendered
himself famous for wisdom or valour, his family and adherents availed
themselves of his superior qualities, magnified his virtues, and
represented his character and person as sacred and supernatural. The
vulgar easily swallowed the bait, implored his protection, and yielded
the tribute of homage and praise, even to adoration; his exploits were
handed down to posterity with a thousand exaggerations; they were
repeated as incitements to virtue; divine honours were paid, and altars
erected to his memory, for the encouragement of those who attempted to
imitate his example; and hence arose the heathen mythology, which is no
other than a collection of extravagant romances. As learning advanced,
and genius received cultivation, these stories were embellished with
the graces of poetry, that they might the better recommend themselves
to the attention; they were sung in public, at festivals, for the
instruction and delight of the audience; and rehearsed before battle,
as incentives to deeds of glory. Thus tragedy and the epic muse were
born, and, in the progress of taste, arrived at perfection. It is no
wonder that the ancients could not relish a fable in prose, after they
had seen so many remarkable events celebrated in verse by their best
poets; we therefore find no romance among them during the era of their
excellence, unless the _Cyropædia_ of Xenophon may be so called; and it
was not till arts and sciences began to revive after the irruption of
the barbarians into Europe, that anything of this kind appeared. But
when the minds of men were debauched by the imposition of priestcraft
to the most absurd pitch of credulity, the authors of romance arose,
and losing sight of probability, filled their performances with the
most monstrous hyperboles. If they could not equal the ancient poets in
point of genius they were resolved to excel them in fiction, and apply
to the wonder, rather than the judgment, of their readers. Accordingly,
they brought necromancy to their aid, and instead of supporting the
character of their heroes by dignity of sentiment and practice,
distinguished them by their bodily strength, activity, and extravagance
of behaviour. Although nothing could be more ludicrous and unnatural
than the figures they drew, they did not want patrons and admirers; and
the world actually began to be infected with the spirit of
knight-errantry, when Cervantes, by an inimitable piece of ridicule,
reformed the taste of mankind, representing chivalry in the right point
of view, and converting romance to purposes far more useful and
entertaining, by making it assume the sock, and point out the follies
of ordinary life.

The same method has been practised by other Spanish and French authors,
and by none more successfully than by Monsieur Le Sage, who, in his
_Adventures of Gil Blas_, has described the knavery and foibles of
life, with infinite humour and sagacity. The following sheets I have
modelled on his plan, taking me liberty, however, to differ from him in
the execution, where I thought his particular situations were uncommon,
extravagant, or peculiar to the country in which the scene is laid. The
disgraces of Gil Blas are, for the most part, such as rather excite
mirth than compassion; he himself laughs at them; and his transitions
from distress to happiness, or at least ease, are so sudden, that
neither the reader has time to pity him, nor himself to be acquainted
with affliction. This conduct, in my opinion, not only deviates from
probability, but prevents that generous indignation, which ought to
animate the reader against the sordid and vicious disposition of the
world. I have attempted to represent modest merit struggling with every
difficulty to which a friendless orphan is exposed, from his own want
of experience, as well as from the selfishness, envy, malice, and base
indifference of mankind. To secure a favourable prepossession, I have
allowed him the advantages of birth and education, which in the series
of his misfortunes will, I hope, engage the ingenuous more warmly in
his behalf; and though I foresee, that some people will be offended at
the mean scenes in which he is involved, I persuade myself that the
judicious will not only perceive the necessity of describing those
situations to which he must of course be confined, in his low estate,
but also find entertainment in viewing those parts of life, where the
humours and passions are undisguised by affectation, ceremony, or
education; and the whimsical peculiarities of disposition appear as
nature has implanted them. But I believe I need not trouble myself in
vindicating a practice authorized by the best writers in this way, some
of whom I have already named.

Every intelligent reader will, at first sight, perceive I have not
deviated from nature in the facts, which are all true in the main,
although the circumstances are altered and disguised, to avoid personal
satire.

It now remains to give my reasons for making the chief personage of
this work a North Briton, which are chiefly these: I could, at a small
expense, bestow on him such education as I thought the dignity of his
birth and character required, which could not possibly be obtained in
England, by such slender means as the nature of my plan would afford.
In the next place, I could represent simplicity of manners in a remote
part of the kingdom, with more propriety than in any place near the
capital; and lastly, the disposition of the Scots, addicted to
travelling, justifies my conduct in deriving an adventurer from that
country. That the delicate reader may not be offended at the unmeaning
oaths which proceed from the mouths of some persons in these memoirs, I
beg leave to promise, that I imagined nothing could more effectually
expose the absurdity of such miserable expletives, than a natural and
verbal representation of the discourse in which they occur.




APOLOGUE


A young painter, indulging a vein of pleasantry, sketched a kind of
conversation piece, representing a bear, an owl, a monkey, and an ass;
and to render it more striking, humorous, and moral, distinguished
every figure by some emblem of human life. Bruin was exhibited in the
garb and attitude of an old, toothless, drunken soldier; the owl
perched upon the handle of a coffee-pot, with spectacle on nose, seemed
to contemplate a newspaper; and the ass, ornamented with a huge tie-wig
(which, however, could not conceal his long ears), sat for his picture
to the monkey, who appeared with the implements of painting. This
whimsical group afforded some mirth, and met with general approbation,
until some mischievous wag hinted that the whole—was a lampoon upon the
friends of the performer; an insinuation which was no sooner circulated
than those very people who applauded it before began to be alarmed, and
even to fancy themselves signified by the several figures of the piece.

Among others, a worthy personage in years, who had served in the army
with reputation, being incensed at the supposed outrage, repaired to
the lodging of the painter, and finding him at home, “Hark ye, Mr.
Monkey,” said he, “I have a good mind to convince you, that though the
bear has lost his teeth, he retains his paws, and that he is not so
drunk but he can perceive your impertinence.” “Sblood! sir, that
toothless jaw is a d—ned scandalous libel—but don’t you imagine me so
chopfallen as not to be able to chew the cud of resentment.” Here he
was interrupted by the arrival of a learned physician, who, advancing
to the culprit with fury in his aspect, exclaimed, “Suppose the
augmentation of the ass’s ears should prove the diminution of the
baboon’s—nay, seek not to prevaricate, for, by the beard of
Aesculapius! there is not one hair in this periwig that will not stand
up in judgment to convict thee of personal abuse. Do but observe,
captain, how this pitiful little fellow has copied the very curls—the
colour, indeed, is different, but then the form and foretop are quite
similar.” While he thus remonstrated in a strain of vociferation, a
venerable senator entered, and waddling up to the delinquent,
“Jackanapes!” cried he, “I will now let thee see I can read something
else than a newspaper, and that without the help of spectacles: here is
your own note of hand, sirrah, for money, which if I had not advanced,
you yourself would have resembled an owl, in not daring to show your
face by day, you ungrateful slanderous knave!”

In vain the astonished painter declared that he had no intention to
give offence, or to characterise particular persons: they affirmed the
resemblance was too palpable to be overlooked; they taxed him with
insolence, malice, and ingratitude; and their clamours being overheard
by the public, the captain was a bear, the doctor an ass, and the
senator an owl, to his dying day.

Christian reader, I beseech thee, in the bowels of the Lord, remember
this example “while thou art employed in the perusal of the following
sheets; and seek not to appropriate to thyself that which equally
belongs to five hundred different people. If thou shouldst meet with a
character that reflects thee in some ungracious particular, keep thy
own counsel; consider that one feature makes not a face, and that
though thou art, perhaps, distinguished by a bottle nose, twenty of thy
neighbours may be in the same predicament.”




THE ADVENTURES OF RODERICK RANDOM




CHAPTER I


Of my Birth and Parentage


I was born in the northern part of this united kingdom, in the house of
my grandfather, a gentleman of considerable fortune and influence, who
had on many occasions signalised himself in behalf of his country; and
was remarkable for his abilities in the law, which he exercised with
great success in the station of a judge, particularly against beggars,
for whom he had a singular aversion.

My father (his youngest son) falling in love with a poor relation, who
lived with the old gentleman in quality of a housekeeper, espoused her
privately; and I was the first fruit of that marriage. During her
pregnancy, a dream discomposed my mother so much that her husband,
tired with her importunity, at last consulted a highland seer, whose
favourable interpretation he would have secured beforehand by a bribe,
but found him incorruptible. She dreamed she was delivered of a
tennis-ball, which the devil (who, to her great surprise, acted the
part of a midwife) struck so forcibly with a racket that it disappeared
in an instant; and she was for some time inconsolable for the lost of
her offspring; when, all on a sudden, she beheld it return with equal
violence, and enter the earth, beneath her feet, whence immediately
sprang up a goodly tree covered with blossoms, the scent of which
operated so strongly on her nerves that she awoke. The attentive sage,
after some deliberation, assured my parents, that their firstborn would
be a great traveller; that he would undergo many dangers and
difficulties, and at last return to his native land, where he would
flourish in happiness and reputation. How truly this was foretold will
appear in the sequel. It was not long before some officious person
informed my grandfather of certain familiarities that passed between
his son and housekeeper which alarmed him so much that, a few days
after, he told my father it was high time for him to think of settling;
and that he had provided a match for him, to which he could in justice
have no objections. My father, finding it would be impossible to
conceal his situation much longer, frankly owned what he had done; and
excused himself for not having asked the consent of his father, by
saying, he knew it would have been to no purpose; and that, had his
inclination been known, my grandfather might have taken such measures
as would have effectually put the gratification of it out of his power:
he added, that no exceptions could be taken to his wife’s virtue,
birth, beauty, and good sense, and as for fortune, it was beneath his
care. The old gentleman, who kept all his passions, except one, in
excellent order, heard him to an end with great temper, and then calmly
asked, how he proposed to maintain himself and spouse? He replied, he
could be in no danger of wanting while his father’s tenderness
remained, which he and his wife should always cultivate with the utmost
veneration; and he was persuaded his allowance would be suitable to the
dignity and circumstances of his family, and to the provision already
made for his brothers and sisters, who were happily settled under his
protection. “Your brothers and sisters,” said my grandfather, “did not
think it beneath them to consult me in an affair of such importance as
matrimony; neither, I suppose, would you have omitted that piece of
duty, had you not some secret fund in reserve; to the comforts of which
I leave you, with a desire that you will this night seek out another
habitation for yourself and wife, whither, in a short time, I will send
you an account of the expense I have been at in your education, with a
view of being reimbursed. Sir, you have made the grand tour—you are a
polite gentleman—a very pretty gentleman—I wish you a great deal of
joy, and am your very humble servant.”

So saying, he left my father in a situation easily imagined. However,
he did not long hesitate; for, being perfectly well acquainted with his
father’s disposition, he did not doubt that he was glad of this
pretence to get rid of him; and his resolves being as invariable as the
laws of the Medes and Persians, he knew it would be to no purpose to
attempt him by prayers and entreaties; so without any farther
application, he betook himself, with his disconsolate bedfellow to a
farm-house, where an old servant of his mother dwelt: there they
remained some time in a situation but ill adapted to the elegance of
their desires and tenderness of their love; which nevertheless my
father chose to endure, rather than supplicate an unnatural and
inflexible parent but my mother, foreseeing the inconveniences to which
she must have been exposed, had she been delivered in this place (and
her pregnancy was very far advanced), without communicating her design
to her husband, went in disguise to the house of my grandfather, hoping
that her tears and condition would move him to compassion, and
reconcile him to an event which was now irrecoverably past.

She found means to deceive the servants, and get introduced as an
unfortunate lady, who wanted to complain of some matrimonial
grievances, it being my grandfather’s particular province to decide in
all cases of scandal. She was accordingly admitted into his presence,
where, discovering herself, she fell at his feet, and in the most
affecting manner implored his forgiveness; at the same time
representing the danger that threatened not only her life, but that of
his own grandchild, which was about to see the light. He told her he
was sorry that the indiscretion of her and his son had compelled him to
make a vow, which put it out of his power to give them any assistance;
that he had already imparted his thoughts on that subject to her
husband, and was surprised that they should disturb his peace with any
farther importunity. This said, he retired.

The violence of my mother’s affliction had such an effect on her
constitution that she was immediately seized with the pains of
childbed; and had not an old maidservant, to whom she was very dear,
afforded her pity and assistance, at the hazard of incurring my
grandfather’s displeasure, she and the innocent fruit of her womb must
have fallen miserable victims to his rigour and inhumanity. By the
friendship of this poor woman she was carried up to a garret, and
immediately delivered of a man child, the story of whose unfortunate
birth he himself now relates. My father, being informed of what had
happened, flew to the embraces of his darling spouse, and while he
loaded his offspring with paternal embraces, could not forbear shedding
a flood of tears on beholding the dear partner of his heart (for whose
ease he would have sacrificed the treasures of the east) stretched upon
a flock bed, in a miserable apartment, unable to protect her from the
inclemencies of the weather. It is not to be supposed that the old
gentleman was ignorant of what passed, though he affected to know
nothing of the matter, and pretended to be very much surprised, when
one of his grandchildren, by his eldest son deceased, who lived with
him as his heir apparent, acquainted him with the affair; he determined
therefore to observe no medium, but immediately (on the third day after
her delivery) sent her a peremptory order to be gone, and turned off
the servant who had preserved her life. This behaviour so exasperated
my father that he had recourse to the most dreadful imprecations; and
on his bare knees implored that Heaven would renounce him if ever he
should forget or forgive the barbarity of his sire.

The injuries which this unhappy mother received from her removal in
such circumstances, and the want of necessaries where she lodged,
together with her grief and anxiety of mind, soon threw her into a
languishing disorder, which put an end to her life. My father, who
loved her tenderly, was so affected with her death that he remained six
weeks deprived of his senses; during which time, the people where he
lodged carried the infant to the old man who relented so far, on
hearing the melancholy story of his daughter-in-law’s death, and the
deplorable condition of his son, as to send the child to nurse, and he
ordered my father to be carried home to his house, where he soon
recovered the use of his reason.

Whether this hardhearted judge felt any remorse for his cruel treatment
of his son and daughter, or (which is more probable) was afraid his
character would suffer in the neighbourhood, he professed great sorrow
for his conduct to my father, whose delirium was succeeded by a
profound melancholy and reserve. At length he disappeared, and,
notwithstanding all imaginable inquiry, could not be heard of; a
circumstance which confirmed most people in the opinion of his having
made away with himself in a fit of despair. How I understood the
particulars of my birth will appear in the course of these memoirs.




CHAPTER II


I grow up—am hated by my Relations—sent to School—neglected by my
Grandfather—maltreated by my Master—seasoned to Adversity—I form Cabals
against the Pedant—am debarred Access to my Grandfather—hunted by his
Heir—I demolish the Teeth of his Tutor


There were not wanting some who suspected my uncles of being concerned
in my father’s fate, on the supposition that they would all share in
the patrimony destined for him; and this conjecture was strengthened by
reflecting that in all his calamities they never discovered the least
inclination to serve him; but, on the contrary, by all the artifices in
their power, fed his resentment and supported his resolution of leaving
him to misery and want. But people of judgment treated this insinuation
as an idle chimera; because, had my relations been so wicked as to
consult their interest by committing such an atrocious crime, the fate
of my father would have extended to me too whose life was another
obstacle to their expectation. Meanwhile, I grew apace, and as I
strongly resembled my father, who was the darling of the tenants, I
wanted nothing which their indigent circumstances could afford: but
their favour was a weak resource against the jealous enmity of my
cousins; who the more my infancy promised, conceived the more
implacable hatred against me: and before I was six years of age, had so
effectually blockaded my grandfather that I never saw him but by
stealth, when I sometimes made up to his chair as he sat to view his
labourers in the field: on which occasion he would stroke my head, bid
me be a good boy, and promise to take care of me.

I was soon after sent to school at a village hard by, of which he had
been dictator time out of mind; but as he never paid for my board, nor
supplied me with clothes, books, and other necessaries I required, my
condition was very ragged and contemptible, and the schoolmaster, who,
through fear of my grandfather, taught me gratis, gave himself no
concern about the progress I made under his instruction. In spite of
all these difficulties and disgraces, I became a good proficient in the
Latin tongue; and, as soon as I could write tolerably, pestered my
grandfather with letters to such a degree that he sent for my master,
and chid him severely for bestowing such pains on my education, telling
him that, if ever I should be brought to the gallows for forgery, which
he had taught me to commit, my blood would lie on his head.

The pedant, who dreaded nothing more than the displeasure of his
patron, assured his honour that the boy’s ability was more owing to his
own genius and application than to any instruction or encouragement he
received; that, although he could not divest him of the knowledge he
had already imbibed, unless he would empower him to disable his
fingers, he should endeavour, with God’s help, to prevent his future
improvement. And, indeed, he punctually performed what he had
undertaken; for, on pretence that I had written impertinent letters to
my grandfather, he caused a board to be made with five holes in it,
through which he thrust the fingers and thumb of my right hand, and
fastened it by whipcord to my wrist, in such a manner as effectually
debarred me the use of my pen. But this restraint I was freed from in a
few days, by an accident which happened in a quarrel between me and
another boy; who, taking upon him to insult my poverty, I was so
incensed at his ungenerous reproach that with one stroke with my
machine I cut him to the skull, to the great terror of myself and
schoolfellows, who left him bleeding on the ground, and ran to inform
the master of what had happened. I was so severely punished for this
trespass that, were I to live to the age of Methusalem, the impression
it made on me would not be effaced; the more than the antipathy and
horror I conceived for the merciless tyrant who inflicted it. The
contempt which my appearance naturally produced in all who saw me, the
continual wants to which I was exposed, and my own haughty disposition,
impatient of affronts, involved me in a thousand troublesome
adventures, by which I was at length inured in adversity, and
emboldened to undertakings far above my years. I was often inhumanly
scourged for crimes I did not commit, because, having the character of
a vagabond in the village, every piece of mischief, whose author lay
unknown, was charged upon me. I have been found guilty of robbing
orchards I never entered, of killing cats I never hunted, of stealing
gingerbread I never touched, and of abusing old women I never saw. Nay,
a stammering carpenter had eloquence enough to persuade my master that
I fired a pistol loaded with small shot into his window; though my
landlady and the whole family bore witness that I was abed fast asleep
at the time when this outrage was committed. I was once flogged for
having narrowly escaped drowning, by the sinking of a ferry boat in
which I was passenger. Another time, for having recovered of a bruise
occasioned by a horse and cart running over me. A third time, for being
bitten by a baker’s dog. In short, whether I was guilty or unfortunate,
the correction and sympathy of this arbitrary pedagogue were the same.

Far from being subdued by this informal usage, my indignation triumphed
over that slavish awe which had hitherto enforced my obedience; and the
more my years and knowledge increased, the more I perceived the
injustice and barbarity of his behaviour. By the help of an uncommon
genius, and the advice and direction of our usher, who had served my
father in his travels, I made a surprising progress in the classics,
writing, and arithmetic; so that, before I was twelve years old, I was
allowed by everybody to be the best scholar in the school. This
qualification, together with the boldness of temper and strength of
make which had subjected almost all my contemporaries, gave me such
influence over them that I began to form cabals against my persecutor;
and was in hope of, being able to bid him defiance in a very short
time. Being at the head of a faction, consisting of thirty boys, most
of them of my own age, I was determined to put their mettle to trial,
that I might know how far they were to be depended upon, before I put
my grand scheme in execution: with this view, we attacked a body of
stout apprentices, who had taken possession of a part of the ground
allotted to us for the scheme of our diversions, and who were then
playing at ninepins on the spot; but I had the mortification to see my
adherents routed in an instant, and a leg of one of them broke in his
flight by the bowl, which one of our adversaries had detached in
pursuit of us. This discomfiture did not hinder us from engaging them
afterwards in frequent skirmishes, which we maintained by throwing
stones at a distance, wherein I received many wounds, the scars of
which still remain. Our enemies were so harassed and interrupted by
these alarms that they at last abandoned their conquest, and left us to
the peaceable enjoyment of our own territories.

It would be endless to enumerate the exploits we performed in the
course of this confederacy, which became the terror of the whole
village; insomuch that, when different interests divided it, one of the
parties commonly courted the assistance of Roderick Random (by which
name I was known) to cast the balance, and keep the opposite faction in
awe. Meanwhile, I took the advantage of every play-day to present
myself before my grandfather, to whom I seldom found access, by reason
of his being closely besieged by a numerous family of his female
grandchildren, who, though they perpetually quarrelled among
themselves, never failed to join against me, as the common enemy of
all. His heir, who was about the age of eighteen, minded nothing but
fox-hunting, and indeed was qualified for nothing else, notwithstanding
his grandfather’s indulgence in entertaining a tutor for him at home;
who at the same time performed the office of parish clerk. This young
Actaeon, who inherited his grandfather’s antipathy to everything in
distress, never sat eyes on me without uncoupling his beagles, and
hunting me into some cottage or other, whither I generally fled for
shelter. In this Christian amusement he was encouraged by his
preceptor, who, no doubt, took such opportunities to ingratiate himself
with the rising sun, observing, that the old gentleman, according to
the course of nature, had not long to live, for he was already on the
verge of fourscore.

The behaviour of this rascally sycophant incensed me so much, that one
day, when I was beleaguered by him and his hounds in a farmer’s house,
where I had found protection, I took aim at him (being an excellent
marksman) with a large pebble, which struck out four of his foreteeth,
and effectually incapacitated him from doing the office of a clerk.




CHAPTER III


My Mother’s Brother arrives—relieves me—a Description of him—he goes
along with me to the House of my Grandfather—is encountered by his
Dogs—defeats them, after a bloody Engagement—is admitted to the old
Gentleman—a Dialogue between them


About this time my mother’s only brother, who had been long abroad,
lieutenant of a man-of-war, arrived in his own country; where being
informed of my condition, he came to see me, and out of his slender
finances not only supplied me with what necessaries I wanted for the
present, but resolved not to leave the country until he had prevailed
on my grandfather to settle something handsome for the future. This was
a task to which he was by no means equal, being entirely ignorant, not
only of the judge’s disposition, but also of the ways of men in
general, to which his education on board had kept him an utter
stranger.

He was a strong built man, somewhat bandy legged, with a neck like that
of a bull, and a face which (you might easily perceive) had withstood
the most obstinate assaults of the weather. His dress consisted of a
soldier’s coat altered for him by the ship’s tailor, a striped flannel
jacket, a pair of red breeches spanned with pitch, clean gray worsted
stockings, large silver buckles that covered three-fourths of his
shoes, a silver-laced hat, whose crown overlooked the brims about an
inch and a half, black bobwig in buckle, a check shirt, a silk
handkerchief, a hanger, with a brass handle, girded to his thigh by a
furnished lace belt, and a good oak plant under his arm. Thus equipped,
he set out with me (who by his bounty made a very decent appearance)
for my grandfather’s house, where we were saluted by Jowler and Caesar,
whom my cousin, young master, had let loose at our approach. Being well
acquainted with the inveteracy of these curs, I was about to betake
myself to my heels, when my uncle seized me with one hand, brandished
his cudgel with the other, and at one blow laid Caesar sprawling on the
ground; but, finding himself attacked at the same time in the rear by
Jowler, and fearing Caesar might recover, he drew his hanger, wheeled
about, and by a lucky stroke severed Jowler’s head from his body. By
this time, the young foxhunter and three servants, armed with
pitchforks and flails, were come to the assistance of the dogs, whom
they found breathless upon the field; and my cousin was so provoked at
the death of his favourites, that he ordered his attendants to advance,
and take vengeance on their executioner, whom he loaded with all the
curses and reproaches his anger could suggest. Upon which my uncle
stepped forwards with an undaunted air, at the sight of whose bloody
weapons his antagonists fell back with precipitation, when he accosted
their leader thus:

“Lookee, brother, your dogs having boarded me without provocation, what
I did was in my own defence. So you had best be civil, and let us shoot
a head, clear of you.”

Whether the young squire misinterpreted my uncle’s desire of peace, or
was enraged at the fate of his hounds beyond his usual pitch of
resolution, I know not; but he snatched a flail from one of his
followers, and came up with a show of assaulting the lieutenant, who,
putting himself in a posture of defence, proceeded thus: “Lookee, you
lubberly son of a w—e, if you come athwart me, ’ware your gingerbread
work. I’ll be foul of your quarter, d—n me.”

This declaration, followed by a flourish of his hanger, seemed to check
the progress of the young gentleman’s choler, who, looking behind him,
perceived his attendants had slunk into the house, shut the gate, and
left him to decide the contention by himself.

Here a parley ensued, which was introduced by my cousin’s asking, “Who
the devil are you? What do you want? Some scoundrel of a seaman, I
suppose, who has deserted and turned thief. But don’t think you shall
escape, sirrah—I’ll have you hang’d, you dog, I will. Your blood shall
pay for that of my two hounds, you ragamuffin. I would not have parted
with them to save your whole generation from the gallows, you ruffian,
you!” “None of your jaw, you swab—none of your jaw,” replied my uncle,
“else I shall trim your laced jacket for you. I shall rub you down with
an oaken towel, my boy, I shall.” So saying, he sheathed his hanger,
and grasped his cudgel. Meanwhile the people of the house being
alarmed, one of my female cousins opened a window, and asked what was
the matter. “The matter!” answered the lieutenant; “no great matter,
young woman; I have business with the old gentleman, and this spark,
belike, won’t allow me to come alongside of him,” that’s all. After a
few minutes pause we were admitted, and conducted to my grandfather’s
chamber through a lane of my relations, who honoured me with very
significant looks as I passed along. When we came into the judge’s
presence my uncle, after two or three sea-bows, expressed himself in
this manner; “Your servant, your servant. What cheer, father? what
cheer? I suppose you don’t know me—mayhap you don’t. My name is Tom
Bowling, and this here boy, you look as if you did not know him
neither; ’tis like you mayn’t. He’s new rigged, i’faith; his cloth
don’t shake in the wind so much as it wont to do. ’Tis my nephew, d’y
see, Roderick Random—your own flesh and blood, old gentleman. Don’t lay
a-stern, you dog,” pulling me forward. My grandfather (who was laid up
with the gout) received this relation, after his long absence, with
that coldness of civility which was peculiar to him; told him he was
glad to see him, and desired him to sit down. “Thank ye, thank ye, sir,
I had as lief stand,” said my uncle; “for my own part, I desire nothing
of you; but, if you have any conscience at all, do something for this
poor boy, who has been used at a very unchristian rate. Unchristian do
I call it? I am sure the Moors in Barbary have more humanity than to
leave their little ones to want. I would fain know why my sister’s son
is more neglected than that there fair-weather Jack” (pointing to the
young squire, who with the rest of my cousins had followed us into the
room). “Is not he as near akin to you as the other? Is he not much
handsomer and better built than that great chucklehead? Come, come,
consider, old gentleman, you are going in a short time to give an
account of your evil actions. Remember the wrongs you did his father,
and make all the satisfaction in your power before it be too late. The
least thing you can do is to settle his father’s portion on him.”

The young ladies, who thought themselves too much concerned to contain
themselves any longer, set up their throats all together against my
protector—“Scurvy companion—saucy tarpaulin—rude, impertinent fellow,
did he think to prescribe to grandpapa? His sister’s brat had been too
well taken care of. Grandpapa was too just not make a difference
between an unnatural, rebellious son and his dutiful, loving children,
who took his advice in all things;” and such expressions were vented
against him with great violence; until the judge at length commanded
silence. He calmly rebuked my uncle for his unmannerly behaviour, which
he said he would excuse on account of his education: he told him he had
been very kind to the boy, whom he had kept at school seven or eight
years, although he was informed he made no progress in his learning but
was addicted to all manner of vice, which he rather believed, because
he himself was witness to a barbarous piece of mischief he had
committed on the jaws of his chaplain. But, however, he would see what
the lad was fit for, and bind him apprentice to some honest tradesman
or other, provided he would mend his manners, and behave for the future
as became him.

The honest tar (whose pride and indignation boiled within him) answered
my grandfather, that it was true he had sent him to school, but it had
cost him nothing, for he had never been at one shilling expense to
furnish him with food, raiment, books, or other necessaries; so that it
was not much to be wondered at, if the boy made small progress; and yet
whoever told him so was a lying, lubberly rascal, and deserved to be
keel-haul’d; for though he (the lieutenant) did not understand those
matters himself, he was well informed as how Rory was the best scholar
of his age in all the country; the truth of which he would maintain, by
laying a wager of his whole half-year’s pay on the boy’s head—with
these words he pulled out his purse, and challenged the company:
“Neither is he predicted to vice, as you affirm, but rather, left like
a wreck, d’ye see, at the mercy of the wind and weather, by your
neglect, old gentleman. As for what happened to your chaplain, I am
only sorry that he did not knock out the scoundrel’s brains instead of
his teeth. By the Lord, if ever I come up with him, he had better be in
Greenland, that’s all. Thank you for your courteous offer of binding
the lad apprentice to a tradesman. I suppose you would make a tailor of
him—would you? I had rather see him hang’d, d’ye see. Come along, Rory,
I perceive how the land lies, my boy—let’s tack about, i’faith—while I
have a shilling you shan’t want a tester. B’we, old gentleman; you’re
bound for the other world, but I believe damnably ill-provided for the
voyage.” Thus ended our visit; and we returned to the village, my uncle
muttering curses all the way against the old shark and the young fry
that surrounded him.




CHAPTER IV


My Grandfather makes his Will—our second Visit—he Dies—his Will is read
in Presence of all his living Descendants—the Disappointment of my
female Cousins—my Uncle’s Behaviour


A few weeks after our first visit, we were informed that the old judge,
at the end of a fit of thoughtfulness, which lasted three days, had
sent for a notary and made his will; that the distemper had mounted
from his legs to his stomach, and, being conscious of his approaching
end, he had desired to see all his descendants without exception. In
obedience to this summons, my uncle set out with me a second time, to
receive the last benediction of my grandfather: often repeating by the
road, “Ey, ey, we have brought up the old hulk at last. You shall
see—you shall see the effect of my admonition,” When we entered his
chamber, which was crowded with his relations, we advanced to the
bedside, where we found him in his last agonies, supported by two of
his granddaughters, who sat on each side of him, sobbing most
piteously, and wiping away the froth and slaver as it gathered on his
lips, which they frequently kissed with a show of great anguish and
affection. My uncle approached him with these words, “What! he’s not
a-weigh. How fare ye? how fare ye, old gentleman? Lord have mercy upon
your poor sinful soul!” Upon which, the dying man turned his languid
eyes towards us, and Mr. Bowling went on—“Here’s poor Roy come to see
you before you die, and to receive your blessing. What, man! don’t
despair, you have been a great sinner, ’tis true,—what then? There’s a
righteous judge above, an’t there? He minds me no more than a porpoise.
Yes, yes, he’s a-going; the land crabs will have him, I see that! his
anchor’s a-peak, i’faith.” This homely consolation scandalised the
company so much, and especially the parson, who probably thought his
province invaded, that we were obliged to retire into another room,
where, in a few minutes, we were convinced of my grandfather’s decease,
by a dismal yell uttered by the young ladies in his apartment; whither
we immediately hastened, and found his heir, who had retired a little
before into a closet, under pretence of giving vent to his sorrow,
asking, with a countenance beslubbered with tears, if his grandpapa was
certainly dead? “Dead!” (says my uncle, looking, at the body) “ay, ay,
I’ll warrant him as dead as a herring. Odd’s fish! now my dream is out
for all the world. I thought I stood upon the forecastle, and saw a
parcel of carrion crows foul of a dead shark: that floated alongside,
and the devil perching upon our spritsail yard, in the likeness of a
blue bear—who, d’ye see jumped overboard upon the carcass and carried
it to the bottom in his claws.” “Out upon thee, reprobate” cries the
parson “out upon thee, blasphemous wretch! Dost thou think his honour’s
soul is in the possession of Satan?” The clamour immediately arose, and
my poor uncle, being, shouldered from one corner of the room to the
other, was obliged to lug out in his own defence, and swear he would
turn out for no man, till such time as he knew who had the title to
send him adrift. “None of your tricks upon travellers,” said he;
“mayhap old Bluff has left my kinsman here his heir: if he has, it will
be the better for his miserable soul. Odds bob! I’d desire no better
news. I’d soon make him a clear shin, I warrant you.” To avoid any
further disturbance, one of my grandfather’s executors, who was
present, assured Mr. Bowling, that his nephew should have all manner of
justice; that a day should be appointed after the funeral for examining
the papers of the deceased, in presence of all his relations; till
which time every desk and cabinet in the house should remain close
sealed; and that he was very welcome to be witness to this ceremony,
which was immediately performed to his satisfaction. In the meantime,
orders were given to provide mourning for all the relations, in which
number I was included; but my uncle would not suffer me to accept of
it, until I should be assured whether or no I had reason to honour his
memory so far. During this interval, the conjectures of people, with
regard to the old gentleman’s will, were various: as it was well known,
he had, besides his landed estate, which was worth £700 per annum, six
or seven thousand pounds at interest, some imagined that the whole real
estate (which he had greatly improved) would go to the young man whom
he always entertained as his heir; and that the money would be equally
divided between my female cousins (five in number) and me. Others were
of opinion, that, as the rest of the children had been already provided
for, he would only bequeath two or three hundred pounds to each of his
granddaughters, and leave the bulk of the sum to me, to atone for his
unnatural usage of my father. At length the important hour arrived, and
the will was produced in the midst of the expectants, whose looks and
gestures formed a group that would have been very entertaining to an
unconcerned spectator. But, the reader can scarce conceive the
astonishment and mortification that appeared, when an attorney
pronounced aloud, the young squire sole heir of all his grandfather’s
estate, personal and real. My uncle, who had listened with great
attention, sucking the head of his cudgel all the while, accompanied
these words of the attorney with a stare, and whew, that alarmed the
whole assembly. The eldest and pertest of my female competitors, who
had been always very officious about my grandfather’s person, inquired,
with a faltering accent and visage as yellow as an orange, “if there
were no legacies?” and was answered, “None at all.” Upon which she
fainted away. The rest, whose expectations, perhaps, were not so
sanguine, supported their disappointment with more resolution, though
not without giving evident marks of indignation, and grief at least as
genuine as that which appeared in them at the old gentleman’s death. My
conductor, after having kicked with his heel for some time against the
wainscot, began: “So there’s no legacy, friend, ha!—here’s an old
succubus; but somebody’s soul howls for it, d—n me!” The parson of the
parish, who was one of the executors, and had acted as ghostly director
to the old man, no sooner heard this exclamation than he cried out,
“Avaunt, unchristian reviler! avaunt! wilt thou not allow the soul of
his honour to rest in peace?” But this zealous pastor did not find
himself so warmly seconded, as formerly, by the young ladies, who now
joined my uncle against him, and accused him of having acted the part
of a busybody with their grandpapa whose ears he had certainly abused
by false stories to their prejudice, or else he would not have
neglected them in such an unnatural manner. The young squire was much
diverted with this scene, and whispered to my uncle, that if he had not
murdered his dogs, he would have shown him glorious fun, by hunting a
black badger (so he termed the clergyman). The surly lieutenant, who
was not in a humour to relish this amusement, replied, “You and your
dogs may be damn’d. I suppose you’ll find them with your old dad, in
the latitude of hell. Come, Rory,—about ship, my lad, we must steer
another course, I think.” And away we went.




CHAPTER V


The Schoolmaster uses me barbarously—I form a Project of Revenge, in
which I am assisted by my Uncle—I leave the Village—am settled at a
University by his Generosity


On our way back to the village, my uncle spoke not a word during the
space of a whole hour, but whistled with great vehemence the tune of
“Why should we quarrel for riches,” etc. his visage being contracted
all the while into a most formidable frown. At length his pace
increased to such a degree that I was left behind a considerable way:
then he waited for me; and when I was almost up with him, called out in
a surly tone, “Bear a hand, damme! must I bring to every minute for
you, you lazy dog.” Then, laying hold of me by the arm, hauled me
along, until his good nature (of which he had a great share) and
reflection getting the better of his he said, “Come, my boy, don’t be
cast down,—the old rascal is in hell, that’s some satisfaction; you
shall go to sea with me, my lad. A light heart and a thin pair of
breeches goes through the world, brave boys, as the song goes—eh!”
Though this proposal did not at all suit my inclination, I was afraid
of discovering my aversion to it, lest I should disoblige the only
friend I had in the world; and he was so much a seaman that he never
dreamt I could have had any objection to his design; consequently gave
himself no trouble in consulting my approbation. But this resolution
was soon dropped, by the device of our usher, who assured Mr. Bowling,
it would be a thousand pities to balk my genius, which would certainly
one day make my fortune on shore, provided it received due cultivation.
Upon which, this generous tar determined (though he could ill afford
it) to give me university education; and accordingly settled my board
and other expenses, at a town not many miles distant, famous for its
colleges, whither we repaired in a short time. But, before the day of
our departure, the schoolmaster, who no longer had the fear of my
grandfather before his eyes, laid aside all decency and restraint, and
not only abused me in the grossest language his rancour could suggest,
as a wicked, profligate, dull, beggarly miscreant, whom he had taught
out of charity; but also inveighed in the most bitter manner against
the memory of the judge (who by the by had procured that settlement for
him), hinting, in pretty plain terms, that the old gentleman’s soul was
damned to all eternity for his injustice in neglecting to pay for my
learning.

This brutal behaviour, added to the sufferings I had formerly undergone
made me think it high time to be revenged on this insolent pedagogue.
Having consulted my adherents, I found them all staunch in their
promises to stand by me; and our scheme was this:—In the afternoon
preceding to the day of our departure for the University, I resolved to
take the advantage of the usher’s going out to make water (which he
regularly did at four o’clock), and shut the great door, that he might
not come to the assistance of his superior. This being done, the
assault was to be begun by my advancing to my master and spitting in
his face. I was to be seconded by two of the strongest boys in the
school, who were devoted to me; their business was to join me in
dragging the tyrant to a bench, over which he was to be laid, and his
bare posteriors heartily flogged, with his own birch, which we proposed
to wrest from him in his struggle; but if we should find him too many
for us all three, we were to demand the assistance of our competitors,
who should be ready to enforce us, or oppose anything that might be
undertaken for the master’s relief. One of my principal assistants was
called Jeremy Gawky, son and heir of a wealthy gentleman in the
neighbourhood; and the name of the other, Hugh Strap, the cadet of a
family which had given shoemakers to the village time out of mind. I
had once saved Gawky’s life, by plunging into a river and dragging him
on shore, when he was on the point of being drowned. I had often
rescued him from the clutches of those whom his insufferable arrogance
had provoked to a resentment he was not able to sustain; and many times
saved his reputation and posteriors, by performing his exercises at
school; so that it is not to be wondered at, if he had a particular
regard for me and my interests. The attachment of Strap flowed from a
voluntary, disinterested inclination, which had manifested itself on
many occasions in my behalf, he having once rendered me the same
service that I had rendered Gawky, by saving my life at the risk of his
own; and often fathered offences that I had committed, for which he
suffered severely, rather than I should feel the weight of the
punishment. These two champions were the more willing to engage in this
enterprise, because they intended to leave the school next day, as well
as I; the first being ordered by his father to return into the country,
and the other being bound apprentice to his barber, at a market town
not far off.

In the meantime, my uncle, being informed of my master’s behaviour to
me, was enraged at his insolence, and vowed revenge so heartily that I
could not refrain from telling him the scheme I had concerted, while he
heard with great satisfaction, at every sentence squirting out a
mouthful of spittle, tinctured with tobacco, of which he constantly
chewed a large quid. At last, pulling up his breeches, he cried, “No,
no, z—ds! that won’t do neither; howsoever, ’tis a bold undertaking, my
lad, that I must say, i’faith; but lookee, lookee, how do you propose
to get clear off—won’t the enemy give chase, my boy?—ay, ay, that he
will, I warrant, and alarm the whole coast; ah! God help thee, more
sail than ballast, Rory. Let me alone for that—leave the whole to me.
I’ll show him the foretopsail, I will. If so be your shipmates are
jolly boys, and won’t flinch, you shall see, you shall see; egad, I’ll
play him such a salt-water trick I’ll bring him to the gangway and
anoint him with a cat-and-nine-tails; he shall have a round dozen
doubled, my lad, he shall—and be left lashed to his meditations.” We
were very proud of our associate, who immediately went to work, and
prepared the instrument of his revenge with great skill and expedition;
after which, he ordered our baggage to be packed up and sent off, a day
before our attempt, and got horses ready to be mounted, as soon as the
affair should be over. At length the hour arrived, when our auxiliary,
seizing the opportunity of the usher’s absence, bolted in, secured the
door, and immediately laid hold of the pedant by his collar who bawled
out, “Murder, Thieves,” with the voice of a Stentor. Though I trembled
all over like an aspen leaf, I knew there was no time to be lost, and
accordingly got up, and summoned our associates to our assistance.
Strap, without any hesitation, obeyed the signal, and seeing me leap
upon the master’s back, ran immediately to one of his legs, which
pulling with all his force, this dreadful adversary was humbled to the
ground; upon which Gawky, who had hitherto remained in his place, under
the influence of a universal trepidation, hastened to the scene of
action, and insulted the fallen tyrant with a loud huzza, in which the
whole school joined. The noise alarmed the usher, who, finding himself
shut out, endeavoured, partly by threats and partly by entreaties, to
procure admission. My uncle bade him have a little patience, and he
would let him in presently; but if he pretended to stir from that
place, it should fare the worse with the son of a bitch his superior,
on whom he intended only to bestow a little wholesome chastisement, for
his barbarous usage of Rory, “to which,” said he, “you are no
stranger.” By this time we had dragged the criminal to a post, to which
Bowling tied him with a rope he had provided on purpose; after having
secured his hands and stripped his back. In this ludicrous posture he
stood (to the no small entertainment of the boys, who crowded about
him, and shouted with great exultation at the novelty of the sight),
venting bitter imprecations against the lieutenant, and reproaching his
scholars with treachery and rebellion; when the usher was admitted,
whom my uncle accosted in this manner: “Harkee, Mr. Syntax, I believe
you are an honest man, d’ye see—and I have a respect for you—but for
all that, we must, for our own security, d’ye see, belay you for a
short time.” With these words, he pulled out some fathoms of cord,
which the honest man no sooner saw than he protested with great
earnestness he would allow no violence to be offered to him, at the
same time accusing me of perfidy and ingratitude. But Bowling
representing that it was in vain to resist, and that he did not mean to
use him with violence and indecency, but only to hinder him from
raising the hue and cry against us before we should be out of their
power, he allowed himself to be bound to his own desk, where he sat a
spectator of the punishment inflicted on his principal. My uncle,
having upbraided this arbitrary wretch with his inhumanity to me, told
him, that he proposed to give him a little discipline for the good of
his soul, which he immediately put in practice, with great vigour and
dexterity. This smart application to the pedant’s withered posteriors
gave him such exquisite pain that he roared like a mad bull, danced,
cursed, and blasphemed, like a frantic bedlamite. When the lieutenant
thought himself sufficiently revenged, he took his leave of him in
these words: “Now, friend, you’ll remember me the longest day you have
to live; I have given you a lesson that will let you know what flogging
is, and teach you to have more sympathy for the future. Shout, boys,
shout!”

This ceremony was no sooner over than my uncle proposed they should
quit the school, and convey their old comrade Rory to the public-house,
about a mile from the village, where he would treat them all. His offer
being joyfully embraced, he addressed himself to Mr. Syntax, and begged
him to accompany us; but this invitation he refused with great disdain,
telling my benefactor he was not the man he took him to be. “Well,
well, old surly,” replied my uncle, shaking his hand, “thou art an
honest fellow notwithstanding; and if ever I have the command of a
ship, thou shalt be our schoolmaster, i’faith.” So saying he dismissed
the boys, and locking the door, left the two preceptors to console one
another; while we moved forwards on our journey, attended by a numerous
retinue, whom he treated according to his promise.

We parted with many tears, and lay that night at an inn on the road,
about ten miles short of the town where I was to remain, at which we
arrived next day, and I found I had no cause to complain of the
accommodations provided for me, in being boarded at the house of an
apothecary, who had married a distant relation of my mother. In a few
days after, my uncle set out for his ship, having settled the necessary
funds for my maintenance and education.




CHAPTER VI


I make great progress in my Studies—am caressed by Everybody—my female
Cousins take notice of me—I reject their Invitation—they are incensed,
and conspire against me—am left destitute by a Misfortune that befalls
my Uncle—Gawky’s Treachery—my Revenge


As I was now capable of reflection, I began to consider my precarious
situation; that I was utterly abandoned by those whose duty it was to
protect me: and that my sole dependence was on the generosity of one
man, who was not only exposed by his profession to continual dangers,
which might one day deprive me of him for ever; but also (no doubt)
subject to those vicissitudes of disposition which a change of fortune
usually creates, or which a better acquaintance with the world might
produce; for I always ascribed his benevolence to the dictates of a
heart as yet undebauched by a commerce with mankind. Alarmed at these
considerations, I resolved to apply myself with great care to my
studies, and enjoy the opportunity in my power: this I did with such
success that, in the space of three years, I understood Greek very
well, was pretty far advanced in the mathematics, and no stranger to
moral and natural philosophy: logic I made no account of; but, above
all things, I valued myself on my taste in the belles lettres, and a
talent for poetry, which had already produced some pieces that had met
with a favourable reception. These qualifications, added to a good face
and shape, acquired the esteem and acquaintance of the most
considerable people in town, and I had the satisfaction to find myself
in some degree of favour with the ladies; an intoxicating piece of good
fortune to one of my amorous complexion! which I obtained, or at least
preserved, by gratifying their propensity to scandal, in lampooning
their rivals.

Two of my female cousins lived in this place, with their mother, since
the death of their father, who left his whole fortune equally divided
between them; so that, if they were not the most beautiful, they were
at least the richest toasts in town; and received daily the addresses
of all the beaux and cavaliers of the country. Although I had hitherto
been looked upon by them with the most supercilious contempt, my
character now attracted their notice so much that I was given to
understand I might be honoured with their acquaintance, if I pleased.

The reader will easily perceive that this condescension either flowed
from the hope of making my poetical capacity subservient to their
malice, or at least of screening themselves from the lash of my
resentment, which they had effectually provoked. I enjoyed this triumph
with great satisfaction, and not only rejected their offer with
disdain, but in all my performances, whether satire or panegyric,
industriously avoided mentioning their names, even while I celebrated
those of their intimates: this neglect mortified their pride
exceedingly and incensed them to such a degree that they were resolved
to make me repent of my indifference. The first stroke of their revenge
consisted in their hiring a poor collegian to write verses against me,
the subject of which was my own poverty, and the catastrophe of my
unhappy parents; but, besides the badness of the composition (of which
they themselves were ashamed), they did not find their account in
endeavouring to reproach me with those misfortunes which they and their
relations had brought upon me; and which consequently reflected much
more dishonour on themselves than on me, who was the innocent victim of
their barbarity and avarice.

Finding this plan miscarry, they found means to irritate a young
gentleman against me, by telling him I had lampooned his mistress; and
so effectually succeeded in the quality of incendiaries that this
enraged lover determined to seize me next night as I returned to my
lodgings from a friend’s house that I frequented: with this view, he
waited in the street, attended by two of his companions, to whom he had
imparted his design of carrying me down to the river, in which proposed
to have me heartily ducked, notwithstanding the severity of the
weather, it being then about the middle of December. But this stratagem
did not succeed; for, being apprised of their ambush, I got home
another way, and by the help of my landlord’s apprentice, discharged a
volley from the garret window, which did great execution upon them, and
next day occasioned so much mirth at their expense that they found
themselves under a necessity of leaving the town, until the adventure
should be entirely forgotten.

My cousins (though twice baffled in their expectation) did not,
however, desist from persecuting me, who had now enraged them beyond a
possibility of forgiveness by detecting their malice and preventing its
effects: neither should I have found them more humane, had I patiently
submitted to their rancour, and borne without murmuring the rigour of
their unreasonable hate; for I have found by experience, that though
small favours may be acknowledged and slight injuries atoned, there is
no wretch so ungrateful as he whom you have most generously obliged,
and no enemy so implacable as those who have done you the greatest
wrong. These good-natured creatures, therefore, had recourse to a
scheme which conspired with a piece of bad news I soon after received,
to give them all the satisfaction they desired: this plan was to
debauch the faith of my companion and confidant, who betrayed the trust
I reposed in him, by imparting to them the particulars of my small
amours, which they published with such exaggerations that I suffered
very much in the opinion of everybody, and was utterly discarded by the
dear creatures whose names had been called in question.

While I was busy in tracing out the author of this treachery, that I
might not only be revenged on him, but also vindicate my character to
my friends, I one day perceived the looks of my landlady much altered,
when I went home to my dinner, and inquiring into the cause, she
screwed up her mouth, and fixed her eyes on the ground, told me her
husband had received a letter from Mr. Bowling, with one inclosed for
me. She was very sorry for what had happened, both for my sake and his
own—people should be more cautious of their conduct—she was always
afraid his brutal behaviour would bring him into some misfortune or
other. As for her part, she should be very ready to befriend me; but
she had a small family of her own to maintain. The world would do
nothing for her if she should come to want—charity begins at home: she
wished I had been bound to some substantial handicraft, such as a
weaver or a shoemaker, rather than loiter away my time in learning
foolish nonsense, that would never bring me in a penny but some folks
are wise, and some are otherwise.

I was listening to this mysterious discourse with great amazement, when
her husband entered, and, without speaking a syllable, put both the
letters into my hand. I received them trembling, and read what follows:

‘To Mr. Roger Potion
    ‘Sir,
    ‘This is to let you know that I have quitted the Thunder man of
    war, being obliged to sheer off for killing my captain, which I did
    fairly on the beach, at Cape Tiberoon, in the Island of Hispaniola;
    having received his fire and returned it, which went through his
    body: and I would serve the best man so that ever stepped between
    stem and stern, if so be that he struck me, as Captain Oakum did. I
    am (thank God) safe among the French, who are very civil, though I
    don’t understand their lingo; and I hope to be restored in a little
    time, for all the great friends and parliamentary interest of the
    captain, for I have sent over to my landlord in Deal an account of
    the whole affair, with our bearings and distances while we were
    engaged, whereby I have desired him to lay it before his majesty,
    who (God bless him) will not suffer an honest tar to be wronged. My
    love to your spouse, and am


‘Your loving friend and servant to command, while
‘Thomas Bowling,’


‘To Roderick Random
    ‘Dear Rory,
    ‘Don’t be grieved at my misfortune, but mind your book, my lad. I
    have got no money to send you, but what of that? Mr. Potion will
    take care of you for the love he bears to me, and let you want for
    nothing; and it shall go hard but I will see him one day repaid. No
    more at present, but rests


‘Your dutiful uncle and servant, till death,
‘Thomas Bowling.’


This letter (which, with the other, was dated from Port Louis, in
Hispaniola) I had no sooner read than the apothecary, shaking his head,
began: “I have a very great regard for Mr. Bowling that’s certain; and
could be well content—but times are very hard. There’s no such thing as
money to be got; I believe ’tis all vanished under ground, for my part.
Besides, I have been out of pocket already, having entertained you
since the beginning of this month, without receiving a sixpence, and
God knows if ever I shall; for I believe it will go hard with your
uncle. And more than that, I was thinking of giving you warning, for I
want your apartment for a new prentice, whom I expect from the country
every hour. So I desire you will this week provide yourself with
another lodging.”

The indignation which this harangue inspired gave me spirits to support
my reverse of fortune, and to tell him I despised his mean selfish
disposition so much that I would rather starve than be beholden to him
for one single meal. Upon which, out of my pocket money, I paid him to
the last farthing of what I owed, and assured him, I would not sleep
another night under his roof.

This said, I sallied out in a transport of rage and sorrow, without
knowing whither to fly for shelter, having not one friend in the world
capable of relieving me, and only three shillings in my purse. After
giving way for a few minutes to the dictates of my rage, I went and
hired a small bedroom, at the rate of one shilling and sixpence per
week, which I was obliged to pay per advance, before the landlord would
receive me: thither I removed my luggage; and next morning got up, with
a view of craving the advice and assistance of a person who had on all
occasions loaded me with caresses and made frequent offers of
friendship, while I was under no necessity of accepting them. He
received me with his wonted affability, and insisted on my breakfasting
with him, a favour which I did not think fit to refuse. But when I
communicated the occasion of my visit, he appeared so disconcerted that
I concluded him wonderfully affected with the misery of my condition
and looked upon him as a man of the most extensive sympathy and
benevolence. He did not leave me long under this mistake; for,
recovering himself from his confusion, he told me he was grieved at my
misfortune, and desired to know what had passed between my landlord,
Mr. Potion, and me. Whereupon I recounted the conversation; and, when I
repeated the answer I made to his ungenerous remonstrance with regard
to my leaving his house, this pretended friend affected a stare, and
exclaimed, “Is it possible you could behave so ill to the man who had
treated you so kindly all along?”

My surprise at hearing this was not at all affected, whatever his might
be; and I gave to understand with some warmth, that I did not imagine
he would so unreasonably espouse the cause of a scoundrel who ought to
be expelled from every social community. This heat of mine gave him all
the advantage he desired over me, and our discourse, after much
altercation, concluded in his desiring never to see me again in that
place; to which desire I yielded my consent, assuring him, that, had I
been as well acquainted with his principles formerly as I was now, he
never should have had an opportunity of making that request. And thus
we parted.

On my return, I met my comrade, Squire Gawky, whom his father had sent,
some time ago, to town, for his improvement in writing, dancing,
fencing, and other modish qualifications. As I had lived with him since
his arrival on the footing of our old intimacy, I made no scruple of
informing him of the lowness of my circumstances, and asking a small
supply of money, to answer my present expense; upon which he pulled out
a handful of halfpence with a shilling or two among them, and swore
that was all he had to keep his pocket till next quarter-day he having
lost the greatest part of his allowance the night before at billiards.
Though this assertion might very well be true, I was extremely
mortified at his indifference: for he neither expressed any sympathy
for my mishap nor desire of alleviating my distress; and accordingly I
left him without uttering one word: but, when I afterwards understood
that he was the person who had formerly betrayed me to the malice of my
cousins, to whom likewise he had carried the tidings of my forlorn
situation, which afforded them great matter of triumph and exultation,
I determined with myself to call him to a severe account for which
purpose I borrowed a sword, and wrote a challenge, desiring him to meet
me at a certain time and place, that I might have an opportunity of
punishing his perfidy, at the expense of his blood. He accepted the
invitation, and I betook myself to the field, though not without
feeling considerable repugnance to the combat, which frequently
attacked me in cold sweats by the way; but the desire of revenge, the
shame of retracting, and hope of conquest, conspired to repel these
unmanly symptoms of fear; and I appeared on the plain with a good
grace: there I waited an hour beyond the time appointed, and was not
ill pleased to find he had no mind to meet me, because I should have an
opportunity of exposing his cowardice, displaying my own courage, and
of beating him soundly wheresoever I should find, without any dread of
the consequence.

Elevated with these suggestions, which entirely banished all thoughts
of my deplorable condition, I went directly to Gawky’s lodgings, where
I was informed of his precipitate retreat, he having set out for the
country in less than an hour after he had received my billet; and I was
vain enough to have the whole story inserted in the news, although I
was fain to sell a gold laced hat to my landlord for less than
half-price, to defray the expenses and contribute to my subsistence.




CHAPTER VII


I am entertained by Mr. Crab—a description of him—I acquire the Art of
Surgery—consult Crab’s Disposition—become necessary to him—an Accident
happens—he advises me to launch out into the world—assists me with
Money—I set out for London


The fumes of my resentment being dissipated, as well as the vanity of
my success, I found myself deserted to all the horrors of extreme want,
and avoided by mankind as a creature of a different species, or rather
as a solitary being, noways comprehended within the scheme or
protection of Providence. My despair had rendered me almost quite
stupified, when I was one day told, that a gentleman desired to see me
at a certain public-house, whither immediately I repaired; and was
introduced to one Mr. Launcelot Crab, a surgeon in town, who was
engaged with two more in drinking a liquor called pop-in, composed by
mixing a quartern of brandy with a quart of small beer. Before I relate
the occasion of this message, I believe it will not be disagreeable to
the reader, if I describe the gentleman who sent for me, and mention
some circumstances of his character and conduct which may illustrate
what follows, and account for his behaviour to me.

This member of the faculty was aged fifty, about five feet high, and
ten round the belly; his face was as capacious as a full moon, and much
of the complexion of a mulberry: his nose, resembling a powder-horn,
was swelled to an enormous size, and studded all over with carbuncles;
and his little gray eyes reflected the rays in such an oblique manner
that, while he looked a person full in the face, one would have
imagined he was admiring the buckle of his shoe. He had long
entertained an implacable resentment against Potion, who, though a
younger practitioner, was better employed than he, and once had the
assurance to perform a cure, whereby he disappointed and disgraced the
prognostic of the said Crab. This quarrel which was at one time upon
the point of being made up, by the interposition and mediation of
friends, had been lately inflamed beyond a possibility of
reconciliation by the respective wives of the opponents, who, chancing
to meet at a christening, disagreed about precedence, proceeded from
invectives to blows, and were with great difficulty, by the gossips,
prevented from converting the occasion of joy into a scene of
lamentation.

The difference between these rivals was in the height of rancour, when
I received the message of Crab, who received me as civilly as I could
have expected from one of his disposition; and, after desiring me to
sit, inquired into the particulars of my leaving the house of Potion;
which when I had related, he said, with a malicious grin, “There’s a
sneaking dog! I always thought him a fellow without a soul, d—n me, a
canting scoundrel, who has crept into business by his hypocrisy, and
kissing the a—e of every body.”—“Ay, ay,” says another, “one might see
with half an eye that the rascal has no honesty in him, by his going so
regularly to church.”

This sentence was confirmed by a third, who assured his companions that
Potion was never known to be disguised in liquor but once, at a meeting
of the godly, where he had distinguished himself by an extempore prayer
an hour long. After this preamble, Crab addressed himself to me in
these words: “Well, my lad, I have heard a good character of you, and
I’ll do for you. You may send your things to my house when you please.
I have given orders for your reception. Zounds! What does the booby
stare at? If you have no mind to embrace my courteous offer, you may
let it alone, and be d—d.” I answered with a submissive bow, that I was
far from rejecting his friendly offer, which I would immediately
accept, as soon as he should inform me on what footing I was to be
entertained. “What footing! D—n my blood,” cried he, “d’ye expect to
have a footman and a couple of horses kept for you?” “No, sir,” I
replied, “my expectations are not quite so sanguine. That I may be as
little burthensome as possible, I would willingly serve in your shop,
by which means I may save you the expense of a journeyman, or porter at
least, for I understand a little pharmacy, having employed some of my
leisure hours in the practice of that art, while I lived with Mr.
Potion; neither am I altogether ignorant of surgery, which I have
studied with great pleasure and application.”—“Oho! you did,” says
Crab. “Gentlemen, here is a complete artist! Studied surgery! What? in
books, I suppose. I shall have you disputing with me one of these days
on points of my profession. You can already account for muscular
motion, I warrant, and explain the mystery of the brain and nerves—ha!
You are too learned for me, d—n me. But let’s have no more of this
stuff. Can you blood and give a clyster, spread a plaster, and prepare
a potion?” Upon my answering in the affirmative, he shock his head,
telling me, he believed he should have little good of me, for all my
promises; but, however, he would take me in for the sake of charity. I
was accordingly that very night admitted to his house, and had an
apartment assigned to me in the garret, which I was fain to put up
with, notwithstanding the mortification my pride suffered in this
change of circumstances.

I was soon convinced of the real motives which induced Crab to receive
me in this manner; for, besides the gratification of his revenge, by
exposing the selfishness of his antagonist, in opposition to his own
generosity, which was all affectation, he had occasion for a young man
who understood something of the profession, to fill up the place of his
eldest apprentice, lately dead, not without violent suspicion of foul
play from his master’s brutality. The knowledge of this circumstance,
together with his daily behaviour to his wife and the young apprentice,
did not at all contribute to my enjoying my new situation with ease;
however, as I did not perceive how I could bestow myself to better
advantage, I resolved to study Crab’s temper with all the application,
and manage it with all the address in my power. And it was not long
before I found out a strange peculiarity of humour which governed his
behaviour towards all his dependents. I observed, when he was pleased,
he was such a niggard of his satisfaction that, if his wife or servants
betrayed the least symptom of participation, he was offended to an
insupportable degree of choler and fury, the effects of which they
seldom failed to feel. And when his indignation was roused, submission
and soothing always exasperated it beyond the bounds of reason and
humanity. I therefore pursued a contrary plan; and one day, when he
honoured me with the names of ignorant whelp and lazy ragamuffin, I
boldly replied, I was neither ignorant nor lazy, since I both
understood and performed my business as well as he could do for his
soul; neither was it just to call me ragamuffin, for I had a whole coat
on my back, and was descended from a better family than any he could
boast an alliance with.

He gave tokens of great amazement at this assurance of mine, and shook
his cane over my head, regarding me all the time with a countenance
truly diabolical. Although I was terribly startled at his menacing
looks and posture, I yet had reflection enough left to convince me I
had gone too far to retract, and that this was the critical minute
which must decide my future lot in his service; I therefore snatched up
the pestle of a mortar, and swore, if he offered to strike me without a
cause, I should see whether his skull or my weapon was hardest.

He continued silent for some time, and at last broke forth into these
ejaculations: “This is fine usage from a servant to his master—very
fine! damnation! but no matter, you shall pay for this, you dog, you
shall; I’ll do your business—yes, yes, I’ll teach you to lift your hand
against me.” So saying, he retired, and left me under dreadful
apprehensions, which vanished entirely at our next meeting, when he
behaved with unusual complacency, and treated me with a glass of punch
after dinner.

By this conduct I got the ascendancy over him in a short time, and
became so necessary to him, in managing his business while he was
engaged at the bottle, that fortune began to wear a kinder aspect; and
I consoled myself for the disregard of my former acquaintance, with the
knowledge I daily imbibed by a close application to the duties of my
employment, in which I succeeded beyond my own expectation. I was on
very good terms with my master’s wife, whose esteem I acquired and
cultivated, by representing Mrs. Potion in the most ridiculous lights
my satirical talents could invent, as well as by rendering her some
Christian offices, when she had been too familiar with the dram bottle,
to which she had oftentimes recourse for consolation, under the
affliction she suffered from a barbarous husband.

In this manner I lived, without hearing the least tidings of my uncle
for the space of two years, during which time I kept little or no
company, being neither in a humour to relish nor in a capacity to
maintain much acquaintance; for the Nabal my master allowed me no
wages, and the small perquisites of my station scarcely supplied me
with the common necessaries of life. I was no longer a pert unthinking
coxcomb, giddy with popular applause, and elevated with the
extravagance of hope: my misfortunes had taught me how little the
caresses of the world, during a man’s prosperity, are to be valued by
him; and how seriously and expeditiously he ought to set about making
himself independent of them. My present appearance, therefore, was the
least of my care, which was wholly engrossed in laying up a stock of
instruction that might secure me against the caprice of fortune for the
future. I became such a sloven, and contracted such an air of
austerity, that everybody pronounced me crestfallen; and Gawky returned
to town without running any risk from my resentment, which was by this
time pretty much cooled, and restrained by prudential reasons so
effectually that I never so much as thought of obtaining satisfaction
for the injuries he had done me.

When I deemed myself sufficiently master of my business I began to cast
about for an opportunity of launching into the world, in hope of
finding some provision that might make amends for the difficulties I
had undergone; but, as this could not be effected without a small sum
of money to equip me for the field, I was in the utmost perplexity how
to raise it, well knowing that Crab, for his own sake, would never put
me in a condition to leave him, when his interest was so much concerned
in my stay. But a small accident, which happened about this time,
determined him in my favour. This was no other than the pregnancy of
his maidservant, who declared her situation to me, assuring me at the
same time that I was the occasion of it.

Although I had no reason to question the truth of this imputation, I
was not ignorant of the familiarities which had passed between her
master and her, taking the advantage of which I represented to her the
folly of laying the burden at my door, when she might dispose of it to
much better purpose with Mr. Crab. She listened to my advice, and next
day acquainted him with the pretended success of their mutual
endeavours. He was far from being overjoyed at this proof of his
vigour, which he foresaw might have very troublesome consequences; not
that he dreaded any domestic grumblings and reproaches from his wife,
whom he kept in perfect subjection; but because he knew it would
furnish his rival Potion with a handle for insulting and undermining
his reputation, there being no scandal equal to that of uncleanness, in
the opinion of those who inhabit the part of the island where he lived.
He therefore took a resolution worthy of himself, which was, to
persuade the girl that she was not with child, but only afflicted with
a disorder incidental to young women, which he could easily remove:
with this view (as he pretended) he prescribed for her such medicines
as he thought would infallibly procure abortion; but in this scheme he
was disappointed, for the maid, being advertised by me of his design,
and at the same time well acquainted with her own condition, absolutely
refused to follow his directions; and threatened to publish her
situation to the world if he would not immediately take some method of
providing for the important occasion, which she expected in a few
months. It was not long before I guessed the result of his
deliberation, by his addressing himself to me one day in this manner:
“I am surprised that a young fellow like you discovers no inclination
to push his fortune in the world. Before I was of your age I was
broiling on the coast of Guinea. D—e! what’s to hinder you from
profiting by the war which will certainly be declared in a short time
against Spain? You may easily get on board of a king’s ship in quality
of surgeon’s mate, where you will certainly see a great deal of
practice, and stand a good chance of getting prize-money.”

I laid hold of this declaration, which I had long wished for, and
assured him I would follow his advice with pleasure, if it were in my
power; but that it was impossible for me to embrace an opportunity of
that kind, as I had no friend to advance a little money to supply me
with what necessaries I should want, and defray the expenses of my
journey to London. He told me that few necessaries were required; and,
as for the expense of my journey, he would lend me money, sufficient
not only for that purpose, but also to maintain me comfortably in
London until I should procure a warrant for my provision on board of
some ship.

I gave him a thousand thanks for his obliging offer (although I was
very well apprised of his motive, which was no other than a design to
lay the bastard to my charge after my departure), and accordingly set
out in a few weeks for London; my whole fortune consisting of one suit
of clothes, half a dozen ruffled shirts, as many plain, two pair of
worsted and a like number of threaded stockings; a case of pocket
instruments, a small edition of Horace, Wiseman’s Surgery, and ten
guineas in cash; for which Crab took my bond, bearing five per cent
interest; at the same time giving me a letter to a member of parliament
for our town, which he said would do my business effectually.




CHAPTER VIII


I arrive at Newcastle—meet with my old Schoolfellow Strap—we determine
to walk together to London—set out on our Journey—put up at a solitary
Alehouse—are disturbed by a strange Adventure in the Night


There is no such convenience as a waggon in this country, and my
finances were too weak to support the expense of hiring a horse: I
determined therefore to set out with the carriers, who transport goods
from one place to another on horseback; and this scheme I accordingly
put in execution on the 1st day of September, 1739, sitting upon a
pack-saddle between two baskets, one of which contained my goods in a
knapsack. But by the time we arrived at Newcastle-upon-Tyne I was so
fatigued with the tediousness of the carriage, and benumbed with the
coldness of the weather, that I resolved to travel the rest of my
journey on foot, rather than proceed in such a disagreeable manner.

The ostler of the inn at which we put up, understanding I was bound for
London, advised me to take my passage in a collier which would be both
cheap and expeditious and withal much easier than to walk upwards of
three hundred miles through deep roads in the winter time, a journey
which he believed I had not strength enough to perform. I was almost
persuaded to take his advice, when one day, stepping into a barber’s
shop to be shaved, the young man, while he lathered my face, accosted
me thus: “Sir, I presume you are a Scotchman.” I answered in the
affirmative. “Pray,” continued he, “from what part of Scotland?” I no
sooner told him, than he discovered great emotion, and not confining
his operation to my chin and upper lip, besmeared my whole face with
great agitation. I was so offended at this profusion that starting up,
I asked him what the d—l he meant by using me so? He begged pardon,
telling me his joy at meeting with a countryman had occasioned some
confusion in him, and craved my name. But, when I declared my name was
Random, he exclaimed in rapture, “How! Rory Random?” “The same,” I
replied, looking at him with astonishment. “What!” cried he, “don’t you
know your old schoolfellow, Hugh Strap?”

At that instant recollecting his face, I flew into his arms, and in the
transport of my joy, gave him back one-half of the suds he had so
lavishly bestowed on my countenance; so that we made a very ludicrous
appearance, and furnished a great deal of mirth for his master and
shopmates, who were witnesses of this scene. When our mutual caresses
were over I sat down again to be shaved, but the poor fellow’s nerves
were so discomposed by this unexpected meeting that his hand could
scarcely hold the razor, with which, nevertheless, he found means to
cut me in three places in as many strokes. His master, perceiving his
disorder, bade another supply his place, and after the operation was
performed, gave Strap leave to pass the rest of the day with me.

We retired immediately to my lodgings, where, calling for some beer, I
desired to be informed of his adventures, which contained nothing more
than that his master dying before his time was out, he had come to
Newcastle about a year ago, in expectation of journeywork, along with
three young fellows of his acquaintance who worked in the keels; that
he had the good fortune of being employed by a very civil master, with
whom he intended to stay till the spring, at which time he proposed to
go to London, where he did not doubt of finding encouragement. When I
communicated to him my situation and design, he did not approve of my
taking a passage by sea, by reason of the danger of a winter voyage,
which is very hazardous along that coast, as well as the precariousness
of the wind, which might possibly detain me a great while, to the no
small detriment of my fortune; whereas, if I would venture by land, he
would bear me company, carry my baggage all the way, and if we should
be fatigued before we could perform the journey it would be no hard
matter for us to find on the road either return horses or waggons, of
which we might take the advantage for a very trifling expense.

I was so ravished at this proposal that I embraced him affectionately,
and assured him he might command my purse to the last farthing; but he
gave me to understand he had saved money sufficient to answer his own
occasions; and that he had a friend in London who would soon introduce
him into business in that capital, and possibly have it in his power to
serve me also.

Having concerted the plan and settled our affairs that night, we
departed next morning by daybreak, armed with a good cudgel each (my
companion being charged with the furniture of us both crammed into one
knapsack), and our money sewed between the linings and waistbands of
our breeches, except some loose silver for our immediate expenses on
the road, We travelled all day at a round pace, but, being ignorant of
the proper stages, were benighted at a good distance from any inn, so
that we were compelled to take up our lodging at a small hedge
alehouse, that stood on a byroad, about half-a-mile from the highway:
there we found a pedlar of our own country, in whose company we regaled
ourselves with bacon and eggs, and a glass of good ale, before a
comfortable fire, conversing all the while very sociably with the
landlord and his daughter, a hale buxom lass, who entertained us with
great good humour, and in whose affection I was vain enough to believe
I had made some progress. About eight o’clock we were all three, at our
own desire, shown into an apartment furnished with two beds, in one of
which Strap and I betook ourselves to rest, and the pedlar occupied the
other, though not before he had prayed a considerable time extempore,
searched into every corner of the room, and fastened the door on the
inside with a strong iron screw, which he carried about with him for
that use.

I slept very sound till midnight when I was disturbed by a violent
motion of the bed, which shook under me with a continual tremor.
Alarmed at this phenomenon, I jogged my companion, whom, to my no small
amazement, I found drenched in sweat, and quaking through every limb;
he told me, with a low faltering voice, that we were undone; for there
was a bloody highwayman, loaded with pistols, in the next room; then,
bidding me make as little noise as possible, he directed me to a small
chink in the board partition through which I could see a thick-set
brawny fellow, with a fierce countenance, sitting at a table with our
young landlady, having a bottle of ale and a brace of pistols before
him.

I listened with great attention, and heard him say, in a terrible tone,
“D—n that son of a b—h, Smack the coachman; he has served me a fine
trick, indeed! but d—ion seize me, if I don’t make him repent it! I’ll
teach the scoundrel to give intelligence to others while he is under
articles with me.”

Our landlady endeavoured to appease this exasperated robber, by saying
he might be mistaken in Smack, who perhaps kept no correspondence with
the other gentleman that robbed his coach; and that, if an accident had
disappointed him to-day, he might soon find opportunities enough to
atone for his lost trouble. “I’ll tell thee what, my dear Bet,” replied
he, “I never had, nor ever shall, while my name is Rifle, have such a
glorious booty as I missed to-day. Z—s! there was £400 in cash to
recruit men for the king’s service, besides the jewels, watches,
swords, and money belonging to the passengers. Had it been my fortune
to have got clear off with so much treasure, I would have purchased a
commission in the army, and made you an officer’s lady, you jade, I
would.” “Well, well,” cries Betty, “we must trust to Providence for
that. But did you find nothing worth taking which escaped the other
gentlemen of the road?” “Not much, faith,” said the lover; “I gleaned a
few things, such as a pair of pops, silver mounted (here they are): I
took them loaded from the captain who had the charge of the money,
together with a gold watch which he had concealed in his breeches. I
likewise found ten Portugal pieces in the shoes of a quaker, whom the
spirit moved to revile me with great bitterness and devotion; but what
I value myself mostly for is, this here purchase, a gold snuffbox, my
girl, with a picture on the inside of the lid; which I untied out of
the tail of a pretty lady’s smock.”

Here, as the devil would have it, the pedlar snored so loud, that the
highwayman, snatching his pistols, started up, crying, “Hell and d-n-n!
I am betrayed! Who’s that in the next room?” Mrs. Betty told him he
need not be uneasy: there were only three poor travellers, who, missing
the road, had taken up their lodgings in the house, and were asleep
long ago. “Travellers,” says he, “spies, you b—ch! But no matter; I’ll
send them all to hell in an instant!” He accordingly ran towards our
door; when his sweetheart interposing, assured him, there was only a
couple of poor young Scotchmen, who were too raw and ignorant to give
him the least cause of suspicion; and the third was a presbyterian
pedlar of the same nation, who had often lodged in the house before.

This declaration satisfied the thief, who swore he was glad there was a
pedlar, for he wanted some linen. Then, in a jovial manner, he put
about the glass, mingling his discourse to Betty with caresses and
familiarities, that spoke him very happy in his amours. During that
part of the conversation which regarded this, Strap had crept under the
bed, where he lay in the agonies of fear; so that it was with great
difficulty I persuaded him our danger was over, and prevailed on him to
awake the pedlar, and inform him of what he had seen and heard.

The itinerant merchant no sooner felt somebody shaking him by the
shoulder, than he started up, called, as loud as he could, “Thieves,
thieves! Lord have mercy upon us!” And Rifle, alarmed at this
exclamation, jumped up, cocked one of his pistols, and turned towards
the door to kill the first man that should enter; for he verily
believed himself beset: when his Dulcinea, after an immoderate fit of
laughter, persuaded him that the poor pedlar, dreaming of thieves, had
only cried out in his sleep.

Meanwhile, my comrade had undeceived our fellow-lodger, and informed
him of his reason for disturbing him; upon which, getting up softly, he
peeped through the hole, and was so terrified with what he saw, that,
falling down on his bare knees, he put up a long petition to Heaven to
deliver him from the hands of that ruffian, and promised never to
defraud a customer for the future of the value of a pin’s point,
provided he might be rescued from the present danger. Whether or not
his disburthening his conscience afforded him any ease I knew not, but
he slipped into bed again, and lay very quiet until the robber and his
mistress were asleep, and snored in concert; then, rising softly, he
untied a rope that was round his pack, which making fast to one end of
it, he opened the window with as little noise as possible, and lowered
his goods into the yard with great dexterity: then he moved gently to
our bedside and bade us farewell, telling us that, as we ran no risk we
might take our rest with great confidence, and in the morning assure
the landlord that we knew nothing of his escape, and, lastly, shaking
us by the hands, and wishing us all manner of success, he let himself
drop from the window without any danger, for the ground was not above a
yard from his feet as he hung on the outside.

Although I did not think proper to accompany him in his flight, I was
not at all free from apprehension when I reflected on what might be the
effect of the highwayman’s disappointment; as he certainly intended to
make free with the pedlar’s ware. Neither was my companion at more ease
in his mind, but on the contrary, so possessed with the dreadful idea
of Rifle, that he solicited me strongly to follow our countryman’s
example, and so elude the fatal resentment of that terrible adventurer,
who would certainly wreak his vengeance on us as accomplices of the
pedlar’s elopement. But I represented to him the danger of giving Rifle
cause to think we know his profession, and suggested that, if ever he
should meet us again on the road, he would look upon us as dangerous
acquaintance, and find it his interest to put us out of the way. I told
him, withal, my confidence in Betty’s good nature, in which he
acquiesced; and during the remaining part of the night we concerted a
proper method of behaviour, to render us unsuspected in the morning.

It was no sooner day than Betty, entering our chamber, and perceiving
our window open, cried out, “Odds-bobs! sure you Scotchmen must have
hot constitutions to lie all night with the window open in such cold
weather.” I feigned to start out of sleep, and, withdrawing the
curtain, called, “What’s the matter?” When she showed me, I affected
surprise, and said, “Bless me! the window was shut when we went to
bed.” “I’ll be hanged,” said she, “if Sawney Waddle, the pedlar, has
not got up in a dream and done it, for I heard him very obstropulous in
his sleep.—Sure I put a chamberpot under his bed!”

With these words she advanced to the bed, in which he lay, and, finding
the sheets cold, exclaimed, “Good lackadaisy! The rogue is fled.”
“Fled,” cried I, with feigned amazement, “God forbid! Sure he has not
robbed us!” Then, springing up, I laid hold of my breeches, and emptied
all my loose money into my hand; which having reckoned, I said, “Heaven
be praised, our money is all safe! Strap, look to the knapsack.” He did
so, and found all was right. Upon which we asked, with seeming concern,
if he had stolen nothing belonging to the house. “No, no,” replied she,
“he has stole nothing but his reckoning;” which, it seems, this pious
pedlar had forgot to discharge in the midst of his devotion.

Betty, after a moment’s pause withdrew, and immediately we could hear
her waken Rifle, who no sooner heard of Waddle’s flight than he jumped
out of bed and dressed, venting a thousand execrations, and vowing to
murder the pedlar if ever he should set eyes on him again: “For,” said
he “the scoundrel has by this time raised the hue and cry against me.”

Having dressed himself in a hurry, he mounted his horse, and for that
time rid us of his company and a thousand fears that were the
consequence of it.

While we were at breakfast, Betty endeavoured, by all the cunning she
was mistress of, to learn whether or no we suspected our fellow-lodger,
whom we saw take horse; but, as we were on our guard, we answered her
sly questions with a simplicity she could not distrust; when, all of a
sudden, we heard the trampling of a horse’s feet at the door. This
noise alarmed Strap so much, whose imagination was wholly engrossed by
the image of Rifle, that, with a countenance as pale as milk, he cried,
“O Lord! there is the highwayman returned!”

Our landlady, staring at these words, said, “What highwayman, young
man? Do you think any highwaymen harbour here?”

Though I was very much disconcerted at this piece of indiscretion in
Strap, I had presence of mind enough to tell her we had met a horseman
the day before, whom Strap had foolishly supposed to be a highwayman,
because he rode with pistols; and that he had been terrified at the
sound of a horse’s feet ever since.

She forced a smile at the ignorance and timidity of my comrade; but I
could perceive, not without great concern, that this account was not at
all satisfactory to her.




CHAPTER IX


We proceed on our Journey—are overtaken by a Highwayman who fires at
Strap—is prevented from shooting me by a Company of Horsemen, who ride
in pursuit of him—Strap is put to Bed at an Inn—Adventures at that Inn


After having paid our score and taken leave of our hostess, who
embraced me tenderly at parting, we proceeded on our journey, blessing
ourselves that we had come off so well. We had not walked above five
miles, when we observed a man on horseback galloping after us, whom we
in a short time recognised to be no other than this formidable hero who
had already given us so much vexation. He stopped hard by me, and asked
if I knew who he was? My astonishment had disconcerted me so much that
I did not hear his question, which he repeated with a volley of oaths
and threats; but I remained as mute as before.

Strap, seeing my discomposure, fell upon his knees in the mud,
uttering, with a lamentable voice, these words: “For Christ’s sake,
have mercy upon us, Mr. Rifle! we know you very well.” “Oho!” cried the
thief, “you do! But you never shall be evidence against me in this
world, you dog!” So saying, he drew a pistol, and fired it at the
unfortunate shaver, who fell flat upon the ground without speaking one
word.

My comrade’s fate and my own situation riveted me to the place where I
stood, deprived of all sense and reflection; so that I did not make the
least attempt either to run away or deprecate the wrath of this
barbarian, who snapped a second pistol at me; but, before he had time
to prime again, perceiving a company of horsemen coming up, he rode
off, and left me standing motionless as a statue, in which posture I
was found by those whose appearance had saved my life. This company
consisted of three men in livery, well armed, with an officer, who (as
I afterwards learned,) was the person from whom Rifle had taken the
pocket pistols the day before; and who, making known his misfortune to
a nobleman he met on the road, and assuring him his non-resistance was
altogether owing to his consideration for the ladies in the coach,
procured the assistance of his lordship’s servants to go in quest of
the plunderer. This holiday captain scampered up to me with great
address, and asked who fired the pistol which he had heard.

As I had not yet recovered my reason, he, before I could answer,
observed a body lying on the ground, at which sight his colour changed,
and he pronounced, with a faltering tongue, “Gentlemen, here’s murder
committed! Let us alight.” “No, no,” said one of his followers, “let us
rather pursue the murderer. Which way went he, young man?”

By this time I had recollected myself so far as to tell them that he
could not be a quarter of a mile before; and to beg one of them to
assist me in conveying the corpse of my friend to the next house, in
order to it being interred. The captain, foreseeing that, in case he
should pursue, he must soon come to action, began to curb his horse,
and gave him the spur at the same time, which treatment making the
creature rear up and snort, he called out, his horse was frightened,
and would not proceed; at the same time wheeling him round and round,
stroking his neck, whistling and wheedling him with “Sirrah,
sirrah—gently, gently.” etc. “Z—ds!”, cried one of the servants, “sure
my lord’s Sorrel is not resty!”

With these words he bestowed a lash on his buttocks, and Sorrel,
disdaining the rein sprang forward with the captain at a pace that
would have soon brought him up with the robber, had not the girtle
(happily for him) given way, by which means he landed in the dirt; and
two of his attendants continued their pursuit, without minding his
situation. Meanwhile one of the three who remained at my desire,
turning the body of Strap, in order to see the wound which had killed
him, found him still warm and breathing: upon which, I immediately let
him blood, and saw him, with inexpressible joy, recover; he having
received no other wound than what his fear had inflicted. Having raised
him upon his legs, we walked together to an inn, about half a mile from
the place, where Strap, who was not quite recovered, went to bed; and
in a little time the third servant returned with the captain’s horse
and furniture, leaving him to crawl after as well as he could.

This gentleman of the sword, upon his arrival, complained grievously of
the bruise occasioned by his fall; and, on the recommendation of the
servant, who warranted my ability, I was employed to bleed him, for
which service he rewarded me with half-a-crown.

The time between this event and dinner I passed in observing a game at
cards between two farmers, an exciseman, and a young fellow in a rusty
gown and cassock, who, as I afterwards understood, was curate of a
neighbouring parish. It was easy to perceive that the match was not
equal; and that the two farmers, who were partners, had to do with a
couple of sharpers, who stripped them of all their cash in a very short
time. But what surprised me very much, was to hear this clergyman reply
to one of the countrymen, who seemed to suspect foul play, in these
words: “D—n me, friend, d’ye question my honour?”

I did not at all wonder to find a cheat in canonicals, this being a
character frequent in my own country; but I was scandalised at the
indecency of his behaviour, which appeared in the oaths he swore, and
the bawdy songs which he sung. At last, to make amends in some sort,
for the damage he had done to the unwary boors, he pulled out a fiddle
from the lining of his gown, and, promising to treat them at dinner,
began to play most melodiously, singing in concert all the while. This
good humour of this parson inspired the company with so much glee that
the farmers soon forgot their losses, and all present went to dancing
in the yard.

While we were agreeably amused in this manner, our musician, spying a
horseman a riding towards the inn, stopped all of a sudden, crying out,
“Gad so! gentlemen, I beg your pardon, there’s our dog of a doctor
coming into the inn.” He immediately commended his instrument, and ran
towards the gate, where he took hold of the vicar’s bridle, and helped
him off, inquiring very cordially into the state of his health.

This rosy son of the church, who might be about the age of fifty,
having alighted and entrusted the curate with his horse, stalked with
great solemnity, into the kitchen, where sitting down by the fire, he
called for a bottle of ale and a pipe; scarce deigning an answer to the
submissive questions of those who inquired about the welfare of his
family. While he indulged himself in this state, amidst a profound
silence, the curate, approaching him with great reverence, asked him if
he would not be pleased to honour him with his company at dinner? To
which interrogation he answered in the negative, saying, he had been to
visit Squire Bumpkin, who had drank himself into a high fever at the
last assizes; and that he had, on leaving his own house, told Betty he
should dine at home. Accordingly when he had made an end of his bottle
and pipe, he rose, and moved with prelatical dignity to the door, where
his journeyman stood ready with his nag. He had no sooner mounted than
the facetious curate, coming into the kitchen, held forth in this
manner: “There the old rascal goes, and the d—l go with him. You see
how the world wags, gentlemen. By gad, this rogue of a vicar does not
deserve to live; and yet he has two livings worth four hundred pounds
per annum, while poor I am fain to do all his drudgery, and ride twenty
miles every Sunday to preach—for what? why, truly, for twenty pounds a
year. I scorn to boast of my own qualifications but—comparisons are
odious. I should be glad to know how this wag-bellied doctor deserves
to be more at ease than me. He can loll in his elbow chair at home,
indulge himself in the best of victuals and wine and enjoy the
conversation of Betty, his housekeeper. You understand me, gentlemen.
Betty is the doctor’s poor kinswoman, and a pretty girl she is; but no
matter for that; ay, and dutiful girl to her parents, whom she visits
regularly every year, though I must own I could never learn in what
county they live, My service t’ye, gentlemen.”

By this time dinner being ready, I waked my companion, and we ate
altogether with great cheerfulness. When our meal was ended, and every
man’s share of the reckoning adjusted, the curate went out on pretence
of some necessary occasion, and, mounting his house, left the two
farmers to satisfy the host in the best manner they could. We were no
sooner informed of this piece of finesse, than the exciseman, who had
been silent hitherto, began to open with a malicious grin: “Ay, ay this
is an old trick of Shuffle; I could not help smiling when he talked of
treating. You must know this is a very curious fellow. He picked up
some scraps of learning while he served young Lord Trifte at the
university. But what he most excels in is pimping. No one knows his
talents better than I, for I was valet-de-chambre to Squire Tattle an
intimate companion of Shuffle’s lord. He got him self into a scrape by
pawning some of his lordship’s clothes on which account he was turned
away; but, as he was acquainted with some particular circumstances of
my lord’s conduct, he did not care to exasperate him too much, and so
made interest for his receiving orders, and afterwards recommended him
to the curacy which he now enjoys. However, the fellow cannot be too
much admired for his dexterity in making a comfortable livelihood, in
spite of such a small allowance. You hear he plays a good stick, and is
really diverting company; these qualifications make him agreeable
wherever he goes; and, as for playing at cards there is not a man
within three counties for him. The truth is, he is a d—able cheat, and
can shift a card with such address that it is impossible to discover
him.”

Here he was interrupted by one of the farmers, who asked, why he had
not justice enough to acquaint them with these particulars before they
engaged in play. The exciseman replied, without any hesitation, that it
was none of his business to intermeddle between man and man; besides,
he did not know they were ignorant of Shuffle’s character, which was
notorious to the whole country. This did not satisfy the other, who
taxed him with abetting and assisting the curate’s knavery, and
insisted on having his share of the winnings returned; this demand the
exciseman as positively refused affirming that, whatever sleights
Shuffle might practise on other occasions, he was very certain that he
had played on the square with them, and would answer it before any
bench in Christendom; so saying, he got up and, having paid his
reckoning, sneaked off.

The Landlord, thrusting his neck into the passage to see if he was
gone, shook his head, saying, “Ah! Lord help us! if every sinner was to
have his deserts. Well, we victuallers must not disoblige the
excisemen. But I know what; if parson Shuffle and he were weighed
together, a straw thrown into either scale would make the balance kick
the beam. But, masters, this is under the rose,” continued Boniface
with a whisper.




CHAPTER X


The Highwayman is taken—we are detained as Evidence against him—proceed
to the next village—he escapes—we arrive at another inn, where we go to
Bed—in the Night we are awaked by a dreadful Adventure—next night we
lodge at the house of a Schoolmaster—our Treatment there


Strap and I were about to depart on our journey, when we perceived a
crowd on the road coming towards us, shouting and hallooing all the
way. As it approached, we could discern a man on horseback in the
middle, with his hands tied behind him, whom we soon knew to be Rifle.
The highwayman, not being so well mounted as the two servants who went
in pursuit of him, was soon overtaken, and, after having discharged his
pistols, made prisoner without any further opposition. They were
carrying him in triumph, amidst the acclamations of the country people,
to a justice of peace in a neighbouring village, but stopped at our inn
to join their companions and take refreshment.

When Rifle was dismounted and placed in the yard, within a circle of
peasants, armed with pitchforks, I was amazed to see what a pitiful
dejected fellow he now appeared, who had but a few hours before filled
me with such terror and confusion. My companion was so much encouraged
by this alteration in his appearance that, going up to the thief, he
presented his clenched fists to his nose, and declared he would either
cudgel or box with the prisoner for a guinea, which he immediately
produced, and began to strip, but was dissuaded from this adventure by
me, who represented to him the folly of the undertaking, as Rifle was
now in the hands of justice, which would, no doubt, give us all
satisfaction enough.

But what made me repent of our impertinent curiosity was our being
detained by the captors, as evidence against him, when we were just
going to set forward. However, there was no remedy; we were obliged to
comply, and accordingly joined in the cavalcade, which luckily took the
same road that we had proposed to follow. About the twilight we arrived
at the place of our destination, but as the justice was gone to visit a
gentleman in the country, with whom (we understood) he would probably
stay all night, the robber was confined in an empty garret, three
stories high, from which it seemed impossible for him to escape; this,
nevertheless, was the case; for next morning when they went up stairs
to bring him before the justice, the bird was flown, having got out at
the window upon the roof from whence he continued his route along the
tops of the adjoining houses, and entered another garret where he
skulked until the family were asleep; at which time he ventured down
stairs, and let himself out by the street-door, which was open.

This event was a great disappointment to those that apprehended him,
who were flushed with the hopes of the reward; but gave me great joy,
as I was permitted now to continue my journey, without any further
molestation. Resolving to make up for the small progress we had
hitherto made, we this day travelled with great vigour and before night
reached a market town twenty miles from the place from whence we set
out in the morning, without meeting any adventure worth notice. Here
having taken up our lodging at an an inn, I found myself so fatigued
that I began to despair of performing our journey on foot, and desired
Strap to inquire if there were any waggon, return horses, or any cheap
carriage in this place, to depart for London next day. He was informed
that the waggon from Newcastle to London had halted there two nights
ago, and that it would be an easy matter to overtake it, if not the
next day, at farthest, the day after the next. This piece of news gave
us some satisfaction; and, after having made a hearty supper on hashed
mutton, we were shown to our room, which contained two beds, the one
allotted for us, and the other for a very honest gentleman, who, we
were told, was then drinking below. Though we could have very well
dispensed with his company, we were glad to submit to this disposition,
as there was not another bed empty in the house; and accordingly went
to rest, after having secured our baggage under the bolster. About two
or three o’clock in the morning I was awaked out of a very profound
sleep by a dreadful noise in the chamber, which did not fail to throw
me into an agony of consternation, when I heard these words pronounced
with a terrible voice: “Blood and wounds! run the halbert into the guts
of him that’s next you, and I’ll blow the other’s brains out
presently.”

This dreadful salutation had no sooner reached the ears of Strap than,
starting out of bed, he ran against somebody in the dark, and
overturned him in an instant; at the same time bawling out, “Fire!
murder! fire!” a cry which in a moment alarmed the whole house, and
filled our chamber with a crowd of naked people. When lights were
brought, the occasion of all this disturbance soon appeared; which was
no other than a fellow lodger, whom we found lying on the floor,
scratching his head, with a look testifying the utmost astonishment at
the concourse of apparitions that surrounded him.

This honest gentleman was, it seems, a recruiting sergeant, who, having
listed two country fellows over night, dreaded they had mutinied, and
threatened to murder him and the drummer who was along with him. This
made such an impression on his imagination, that he got up in his sleep
and expressed himself as above. When our apprehension of danger
vanished, the company beheld one another with great surprise and mirth;
but what attracted the notice of everyone was our landlady, with
nothing on her but her shift and a large pair of buckskin breeches,
with the backside before, which she had slipped on in the hurry, and
her husband with her petticoat about his shoulders; one had wrapped
himself in a blanket, another was covered with a sheet, and the
drummer, who had given his only shirt to be washed, appeared in cuerpo
with a bolster rolled about his middle.

When this affair was discussed, everybody retired to his own apartment,
the sergeant slipped into bed, and my companion and I slept without any
further disturbance till morning, when we got up, went to breakfast,
paid our reckoning, and set forward in expectation of overtaking the
waggon; in which hope, however, we were disappointed for that day. As
we exerted ourselves more than usual, I found myself quite spent with
fatigue, when we entered a small village in the twilight. We inquired
for a public-house, and were directed to one of a very sorry
appearance. At our entrance the landlord, who seemed to be a venerable
old man, with long gray hair, rose from a table placed by a large fire
in a very neat paved kitchen, and with a cheerful countenance accosted
us in these words: “Salvete, pueri. Ingredimini.” I was not a little
pleased to hear our host speak Latin, because I was in hope of
recommending myself to him by my knowledge in that language; I
therefore answered, without hesitation, “Dissolve frigus, ligna super
foco—large reponens.” I had no sooner pronounced these words, than the
old gentleman, running towards me, shook me by the hand, crying, “Fili
mi dilectissime! unde venis?—a superis, ni fallor?” In short, finding
we were both read in the classics, he did not know how to testify his
regard enough; but ordered his daughter, a jolly rosy-cheeked damsel
who was his sole domestic, to bring us a bottle of his quadrimum,
repeating from Horace at the same time, “Deprome quadrimum sabina, O
Tholiarche, merum diota.” This was excellent ale of his own brewing, of
which he told us he had always an amphora four years old, for the use
of himself and friends.

In the course of our conversation, which was interlarded with scraps of
Latin, we understood that this facetious person was a schoolmaster,
whose income being small, he was fain to keep a glass of good liquor
for the entertainment of passengers by which he made shift to make the
two ends of the year meet. “I am this day,” said he, “the happiest old
fellow in his majesty’s dominions. My wife, rest her soul, is in
heaven. My daughter is to be married next week; but the two chief
pleasures of my life are these (pointing to the bottle and a large
edition of Horace that lay on the table). I am old, ’tis true—what
then? the more reason I should enjoy the small share of life that
remains, as my friend Flaccus advises: ‘Tu ne quaesieris (scire nefas)
quem mihi, quem tibi finem dii dederint. Carpe diem, quam minimum
credula postero.’”

As he was very inquisitive about our affairs, we made no scruple of
acquainting him with our situation, which when he had learned, he
enriched us with advices how to behave in the world, telling us that he
was no stranger to the deceits of mankind. In the meantime he ordered
his daughter to lay a fowl to the fire for supper, for he was resolved
this night to regale his friends—permittens divis caetera. While our
entertainment was preparing, our host recounted the adventures of his
own life, which, as they contained nothing remarkable, I forbear to
rehearse. When we had fared sumptuously, and drunk several bottles of
his I expressed a desire of going to rest, which was with some
difficulty complied with, after he had informed us that we should
overtake the waggon by noon next day; and that there was room enough in
it for half-a-dozen, for there were only four passengers as yet in that
convenience.

Before my comrade and I fell asleep, we had some conversation about the
good humour of our landlord, which gave Strap such an idea of his
benevolence, that he positively believed we should pay nothing for our
lodging and entertainment. “Don’t you observe,” said he, “that he has
conceived a particular affection for us—nay, even treated us at supper
with extraordinary fare, which, to be sure, we should not of ourselves
have called for?”

I was partly of Strap’s opinion; but the experience I had of the world
made me suspend my belief till the morning, when, getting up betimes,
we breakfasted with our host and his daughter on hasty-pudding and ale,
and desired to know what we had to pay. “Biddy will let you know,
gentlemen,” said he; “for I never mind these matters. Money matters are
beneath the concern of one who lives upon the Horatian plan—Crescentum
sequitur cura pecuniam.” Meanwhile, Biddy, having consulted a slate
that hung in the corner, told us our reckoning came to 8s. 7d. “Eight
shillings and seven pence!” cried Strap, “’tis impossible! you must be
mistaken, young woman.” “Reckon again, child,” says her father, very
deliberately; “perhaps you have miscounted.” “No, indeed,” replied she,
“I know my business better.” I could contain my indignation no longer,
but said it was an unconscionable bill, and demanded to know the
particulars; upon which the old man got up, muttering, “Ay, ay, let us
see the particulars—that’s but reasonable.” And, taking pen, ink, and
paper, wrote the following items:

To bread and beer	0 6 To a fowl and sausages	2 6 To four bottles
of _quadrim_	2 0 To fire and tobacco	0 7 To lodging	2 0 To
breakfast	1 0 —— 8 7

As he had not the appearance of a common publican, and had raised a
sort of veneration in me by his demeanour the preceding night, it was
not in my power to upbraid him as he deserved; therefore, I contented
myself with saying I was sure he did not learn to be an extortioner
from Horace. He answered, I was but a young man and did not know the
world, or I would not tax him with extortion, whose only aim was to
live contentus parvo, and keep off importuna pauperies. My fellow
traveller could not so easily put up with this imposition; but swore he
should either take one-third of the money or go without. While we were
engaged in this dispute, I perceived the daughter go out, and,
conjecturing the occasion, immediately paid the exorbitant demand,
which was no sooner done than Biddy returned with two stout fellows,
who came in on pretence of taking their morning draught, but in reality
to frighten us into compliance. Just as we departed, Strap, who was
half-distracted on account of this piece of expense, went up to the
schoolmaster, and, grinning in his face, pronounced with great
emphasis—“Semper avarus eget.” To which the pedant replied, with a
malicious smile—“Animum rege, qui, nisi paret, imperat.”




CHAPTER XI


We descry the Waggon—get into it—arrive at an inn—our Fellow Travellers
described—a Mistake is committed by Strap, which produces strange
things


We travelled half-a-mile without exchanging one word; my thoughts being
engrossed by the knavery of the world, to which I must be daily
exposed, and the contemplation of my finances, which began sensibly to
diminish. At length, Strap, who could hold no longer, addressed me
thus: “Well, fools and their money are soon parted. If my advice had
been taken, that old skin-flint should have been d—n’d before he had
got more than the third of his demand. ’Tis a sure sign you came easily
by your money, when you squander it away in this manner. Ah! God help
you, how many bristly beards must I have mowed before I earned four
shillings and threepence-halfpenny, which is all thrown to the dogs!
How many days have I sat weaving hair till my toes were numbed by the
cold, my fingers cramped, and my nose as blue as the sign of the
periwig that hung over the door! What the devil was you afraid of? I
would have engaged to box with any one of those fellows who came in for
a guinea—I’m sure—I have beat stouter men than either of them.” And,
indeed, my companion would have fought anybody when his life was in no
danger; but he had a mortal aversion to fire-arms and all instruments
of death. In order to appease him, I assured him no part of this
extraordinary expense should fall upon his shoulders; at which
declaration he was affronted, and told me he would have me to know
that, although he was a poor barber’s boy, yet he had a soul to spend
big money with the best squire of the land.

Having walked all day at a great pace, without halting for a
refreshment, we descried, toward the evening, to our inexpressible joy,
the waggon about a quarter of a mile before us; and, by that time we
reached it, were both of us so weary that I verily believe it would
have been impracticable for us to have walked one mile farther. We,
therefore, bargained with the driver, whose name was Joey, to give us a
cast to the next stage for a shilling; at which place we should meet
the master of the waggon, with whom we might agree for the rest of the
journey.

Accordingly the convenience stopped, and Joey having placed the ladder,
Strap (being loaded with our baggage) mounted first; but, just as he
was getting in, a tremendous voice assailed his ears in these words:
“God’s fury! there shall no passengers come here.” The poor shaver was
so disconcerted at this exclamation, which both he and I imagined
proceeded from the mouth of a giant, that he descended with great
velocity and a countenance as white as paper. Joey, perceiving our
astonishment, called, with an arch sneer, “Waunds, coptain, whay woant
yau sooffer the poor waggoneer to meake a penny? Coom, coom, young man,
get oop, get oop, never moind the coptain; I’se not afeard of the
coptain.”

This was not encouragement sufficient to Strap, who could not be
prevailed upon to venture up again; upon which I attempted, though not
without a quaking heart, when I heard the same voice muttering, like
distant thunder—“Hell and the devil confound me, if I don’t make you
smart for this!” However, I crept in, and by accident got an empty
place in the straw, which I immediately took possession of, without
being able to discern the faces of my fellow-travellers in the dark.
Strap following, with the knapsack on his back, chanced to take the
other side, and, by a jolt of the carriage, pitched directly upon the
stomach of the captain, who bellowed out, in a most dreadful manner,
“Blood and thunder! where’s my sword?” At these words my frighted
comrade started up, and, at one spring, bounced against me with such
force that I thought he was the supposed son of Anak, who intended to
press me to death. In the meantime a female voice cried, “Bless me!
what is the matter, my dear?” “The matter,” replied the captain, “d—n
my blood! my guts are squeezed into a pancake by that Scotchman’s
hump.” Strap, trembling all the while at my back, asked him pardon, and
laid the blame of what had happened upon the jolting of the waggon; and
the woman who spoke before went on: “Ay, ay, my dear, it is our own
fault; we may thank ourselves for all the inconveniences we meet with.
I thank God I never travelled so before. I am sure if my lady or Sir
John were to know where we are they would not sleep this night for
vexation. I wish to God we had writ for the chariot; I know we shall
never be forgiven.” “Come, come, my dear,” replied the captain, “it
don’t signify fretting now; we shall laugh it over as a frolic; I hope
you will not suffer in your health. I shall make my lord very merry
with our adventures in this diligence.”

The discourse gave me such a high notion of the captain and his lady
that I durst not venture to join in the conversation; but immediately
after another female voice began: “Some people give themselves a great
many needless airs; better folks than any here have travelled in
waggons before now. Some of us have rode in coaches and chariots, with
three footmen behind them, without making so much fuss about it. What
then? We are now all upon a footing; therefore let us be sociable and
merry. What do you say, Isaac? Is not this a good motion, you doting
rogue? Speak, you old cent per cent fornicator? What desperate debt are
you thinking of? What mortgage are you planning? Well, Isaac,
positively you shall never gain my favour till you turn over a new
leaf, grow honest, and live like a gentleman. In the meantime give me a
kiss, you old fumbler.” These words, accompanied with a hearty smack,
enlivened the person to whom they were addressed to such a degree that
he cried, in transport, though with a faltering voice, “Ah! you wanton
baggage—upon my credit, you are a waggish girl—he, he, he!” This laugh
introduced a fit of coughing, which almost suffocated the poor usurer
(such we afterwards found was the profession of this our
fellow-traveller).

About this time I fell asleep, and enjoyed a comfortable nap till such
time as we arrived at the inn where we put up. Here, having alighted
from the waggon, I had an opportunity of viewing the passengers in
order as they entered. The first who appeared was a brisk, airy girl,
about twenty years old, with a silver-laced hat on her head instead of
a cap, a blue stuff riding-suit, trimmed with silver very much
tarnished, and a whip in her hand. After her came, limping, an old man,
with a worsted nightcap buttoned under his chin, and a broad-brimmed
hat slouched over it, an old rusty blue cloak tied about his neck,
under which appeared a brown surtout, that covered a threadbare coat
and waistcoat, and, as he afterwards discerned, a dirty flannel jacket.
His eyes were hollow, bleared, and gummy; his face was shrivelled into
a thousand wrinkles, his gums were destitute of teeth, his nose sharp
and drooping, his chin peaked and prominent, so that, when he mumped or
spoke, they approached one another like a pair of nutcrackers: he
supported himself on an ivory-headed cane and his whole figure was a
just emblem of winter, famine, and avarice. But how was I surprised,
when I beheld the formidable captain in the shape of a little thin
creature, about the age of forty, with a long withered visage, very
much resembling that of a baboon, through the upper part of which two
little gray eyes peeped: he wore his own hair in a queue that reached
to his rump, which immoderate length, I suppose, was the occasion of a
baldness that appeared on the crown of his head when he deigned to take
off his hat, which was very much of the size and cock of Pistol’s.

Having laid aside his great-coat, I could not help admiring the
extraordinary make of this man of war: he was about five feet and three
inches high, sixteen inches of which went to his face and long scraggy
neck: his thighs were about six inches in length, his legs resembling
spindles or drumsticks, five feet and a half, and his body, which put
me in mind of extension without substance, engrossed the remainder: so
that on the whole, he appeared like a spider or grasshopper erect, and
was almost a vox et praeterea nihil. His dress consisted of a frock of
what is called bearskin, the skirts of which were about half a foot
long, an hussar waistcoat, scarlet breeches reaching half way down his
thighs, worsted stockings rolled up almost to his groin, and shoes with
wooden heels at least two inches high; he carried a sword very near as
long as himself in one hand, and with the other conducted his lady, who
seemed to be a woman of his own age, and still retained some remains of
an agreeable person, but so ridiculously affected, that, had I not been
a novice in the world, I might have easily perceived in her the
deplorable vanity and second-hand airs of a lady’s woman.

We were all assembled in the kitchen, when Captain Weazel (for that was
his name) desired a room with a fire for himself and spouse, and told
the landlord they would up by themselves. The innkeeper replied that he
could not afford them a room by themselves; and as for supping, he had
prepared victuals for the passengers in the waggon, without respect of
persons, but if he could prevail on the rest to let him have his choice
in a separate manner, he should be very well pleased. This was no
sooner said than all of us declared against the proposal, and Miss
Jenny (our other female passenger), observed that, if Captain Weazel
and his lady had a mind to sup by themselves, they might wait until we
should have done. At this hint the captain put on a martial frown, and
looked very big, without speaking; while his yokefellow, with a
disdainful toss of her nose, muttered something about “Creature!” which
Miss Jenny overhearing, stepped up to her, saying, “None of your names,
good Mrs. Abigail. Creature, quotha—I’ll assure you no such creature as
you neither—no ten-pound sneaker—no quality-coupler.” Here the captain
interposed, with a “D—e, madam, what do you mean by that?” “D—n you
sir, who are you?” replied Miss Jenny, “who made you a captain, you
pitiful, trencher-scraping, pimping curler? ’Sdeath! the army is come
to a fine pass, when such fellows as you get commissions. What, I
suppose you think I don’t know you? Egad, you and your helpmate are
well met—a cast-off mistress and a bald valet-de-chambre are well yoked
together.” “Blood and wounds!” cried Weazel, “d’ye question the honour
of my wife, madam? Hell and d-ion! No man in England durst say so
much—I would flay him, carbonado him! Fury and destruction! I would
have his liver for my supper.” So saying, he drew his sword and
flourished with it, to the great terror of Strap; while Miss Jenny,
snapping her fingers, told him she did not value his resentment a
louse.

In the midst of this quarrel the master of the waggon alighted, who,
understanding the cause of the disturbance, and fearing the captain and
his lady would take umbrage and leave his carriage, was at great pains
to have everything made up, which he at last accomplished, and we sat
down to supper altogether. At bedtime we were shown to our apartments;
the old usurer, Strap, and I, to one room; the captain, his wife, and
Miss Jenny, to another. About midnight, my companion’s bowels being
disordered, he got up, in order to go backward, but in his return,
mistaking one door for another, entered Weazel’s chamber, and without
any hesitation went to bed to his wife, who was fast asleep, the
captain being at another end of the room groping for some empty vessel,
in lieu of his own chamberpot, which was leaky: as he did not perceive
Strap coming in, he went towards his own bed, after having found a
convenience; but no sooner did he feel a rough head, covered with a
cotton nightcap, than it came into his mind that he had mistaken Miss
Jenny’s bed instead of his own, and that the head he felt was that of
some gallant, with whom she had made an assignation. Full of his
conjecture, and scandalised at the prostitution of his apartment, he
snatched up the vessel he had just before filled, and emptied it at
once on the astonished barber and his own wife, who waking at that
instant, broke forth into lamentable cries, which not only alarmed the
husband beyond measure, but frighted poor Strap almost out of his
senses; for he verily believed himself bewitched, especially when the
incensed captain seized him by the throat, with a volley of oaths,
asking him how he durst have the presumption to attempt the chastity of
his wife. Poor Strap was so amazed and confounded, that he could say
nothing but—“I take God to witness she’s a virgin for me.”

Mrs. Weazel, enraged to find herself in such a pickle through the
precipitation of her husband, arose in her shift, and with the heel of
her shoe which she found by the bedside, belaboured the captain’s bald
pate till he roared “Murder.” “I’ll teach you to empty your stinkpots
on me,” cried she, “you pitiful hop-o’-my-thumb coxcomb. What, I
warrant you’re jealous, you man of lath. Was it for this I condescended
to take you to my bed, you poor, withered, sapless twig?”

The noise occasioned by this adventure had brought the master of the
waggon and me to the door, where we overheard all that passed with
great satisfaction. In the meantime we were alarmed with the cry of
“Rape! Murder! Rape!” which Jenny pronounced with great vociferation.
“Oh! You vile abominable old villain,” said she, “would you rob me of
my virtue? But I’ll be revenged of you, you old goat! I will! Help! for
heaven’s sake! help! I shall be ravished! ruined! help!” Some servants
of the inn, hearing this cry, came running upstairs with lights, and
such weapons as chance afforded; when we beheld a very diverting scene.
In one corner stood the poor captain shivering in his shirt, which was
all torn to rags: with a woeful visage, scratched all over by his wife,
who had by this time wrapped the counterpane about her, and sat sobbing
on the side of her bed. At the other end lay the old usurer, sprawling
on Miss Jenny’s bed, with his flannel jacket over his shirt, and his
tawny meagre limbs exposed to the air; while she held him fast by the
two ears, and loaded him with execrations. When he asked what was the
matter, she affected to weep, told us she was afraid that wicked rogue
had ruined her in her sleep, and bade us take notice of what we saw,
for she intended to make use of our evidence against him. The poor
wretch looked like one more dead than alive, and begged to be released;
a favour which he had no sooner obtained than he protested she was no
woman, but a devil incarnate—that she had first seduced his flesh to
rebel, and then betrayed him. “Yes, cockatrice,” continued he, “you
know you laid this snare for me—but you shan’t succeed—for I will hang
myself before you shall get a farthing of me.” So saying, he crawled to
his own bed, groaning all the way. We then advanced to the Captain, who
told us, “Gentlemen, here has been a d—d mistake; but I’ll be revenged
on him who was the cause of it. That Scotchman who carries the knapsack
shall not breathe this vital air another day, if my name be Weazel. My
dear, I ask you ten thousand pardons; you are sensible, I could mean no
harm to you.” “I know not what you meant,” replied she, sighing, “but I
know I have got enough to send me to my grave.” At length they were
reconciled. The wife was complimented with a share of Miss Jenny’s bed
(her own being overflowed), and the master of the waggon invited Weazel
to sleep the remaining part of the night with him. I retired to mine,
where I found Strap mortally afraid, he having stolen away in the dark
while the captain and his lady were at loggerheads.




CHAPTER XII


Captain Weazel challenges Strap, who declines the Combat—an Affair
between the Captain and me—the Usurer is fain to give Miss Jenny five
Guineas for a Release—we are in Danger of losing a Meal—the Behaviour
of Weazel, Jenny, and Joey, on that Occasion—an Account of Captain
Weazel and his Lady—the Captain’s Courage tried—Isaac’s mirth at the
Captain’s Expense


Next morning I agreed to give the master of the waggon ten shillings
for my passage to London, provided Strap should be allowed to take my
place when I should be disposed to walk. At the same time I desired him
to appease the incensed captain, who had entered the kitchen with a
drawn sword in his hand, and threatened with many oaths to sacrifice
the villain who attempted to violate his bed; but it was to no purpose
for the master to explain the mistake, and assure him of the poor lad’s
innocence, who stood trembling behind me all the while: the more
submission that appeared in Strap, the more implacable seemed the
resentment of Weazel, who swore he must either fight him or he would
instantly put him to death. I was extremely provoked at this insolence,
and told him, it could not be supposed that a poor barber lad would
engage a man of the sword at his own weapon; but I was persuaded he
would wrestle or box with him. To which proposal Strap immediately gave
assent, by saying, “he would box with him for a guinea.” Weazel replied
with a look of disdain, that it was beneath any gentleman of his
character to fight like a porter, or even to put himself on a footing,
in any respect, with such a fellow as Strap. “Odds bodikins!” cries
Joey, “sure, coptain, yaw would not commit moorder! Here’s a poor lad
that is willing to make atonement for his offence; and an that woan’t
satisfie yaw, offers to fight yaw fairly. And yaw woan’t box, I dare
say, he will coodgel with yaw. Woan’t yaw, my lad?” Strap, after some
hesitation, answered, “Yes, yes, I’ll cudgel with him.” But this
expedient being also rejected by the captain, I began to smell his
character, and, tipping Strap the wink, told the captain that I had
always heard it said, the person who receives a challenge should have
the choice of the weapons; this therefore being the rule in point of
honour, I would venture to promise on the head of my companion, that he
would even fight Captain Weazel at sharps; but it should be with such
sharps as Strap was best acquainted with, namely, razors. At my
mentioning razors: I could perceive the captain’s colour change while
Strap, pulling me by the sleeve, whispered with great eagerness: “No,
no, no; for the love of God, don’t make any such bargain.” At length,
Weazel, recovering himself, turned towards me, and with a ferocious
countenance asked, “Who the devil are you? Will you fight me?” With
these words, putting himself in a posture, I was grievously alarmed at
seeing the point of a sword within half a foot of my breast; and,
springing to one side, snatched up a spit that stood in the
chimney-corner, with which I kept my formidable adversary at bay, who
made a great many half-longes, skipping backward at every push, till at
last I pinned him up in a corner, to the no small diversion of the
company. While he was in this situation his wife entered, and, seeing
her husband in these dangerous circumstances, uttered a dreadful
scream: in this emergency, Weazel demanded a cessation, which was
immediately granted; and at last was contented with the submission of
Strap, who, falling on his knees before him, protested the innocence of
his intention, and asked pardon for the mistake he had committed. This
affair being ended without bloodshed, we went to breakfast, but missed
two of our company, namely, Miss Jenny and the usurer. As for the
first, Mrs. Weazel informed us, that she had kept her awake all night
with her groans; and that when she rose in the morning, Miss Jenny was
so much indisposed that she could not proceed on her journey. At that
instant, a message came from her to the master of the waggon, who
immediately went into her chamber, followed by us all. She told him in
a lamentable tone, that she was afraid of a miscarriage, owing to the
fright she received last night from the brutality of Isaac; and, as the
event was uncertain, desired the usurer might be detained to answer for
the consequence. Accordingly, this ancient Tarquin was found in the
waggon, whither he had retired to avoid the shame of last night’s
disgrace, and brought by force into her presence. He no sooner appeared
than she began to weep and sigh most piteously, and told us, if she
died, she would leave her blood upon the head of that ravisher. Poor
Isaac turned up his eyes and hands to heaven, prayed that God would
deliver him from the machinations of that Jezebel; and assured us, with
tears in his eyes, that his being found in bed with her was the result
of her own invitation. The waggoner, understanding the case, advised
Isaac to make it up, by giving her a sum of money: to which advice he
replied with great vehemence, “A sum of money!—a halter for the
cockatrice!” “Oh! ’tis very well,” said Miss Jenny; “I see it is in
vain to attempt that flinty heart of his by fair means. Joey, be so
good as to go to the justice, and tell him there is a sick person here,
who wants to see him on an affair of consequence.” At the name of
justice Isaac trembled, and bidding Joey stay, asked with a quavering
voice, “What she would have? She told him that, as he had not
perpetrated his wicked purpose, she would be satisfied with a small
matter. And though the damage she might sustain in her health might be
irreparable, she would give him a release for a hundred guineas.” “A
hundred guineas!” cried he in an ecstacy, “a hundred furies! Where
should a poor old wretch like me have a hundred guineas? If I had so
much money, d’ya think I should be found travelling in a waggon, at
this season of the year?” “Come, come,” replied Jenny, “none of your
miserly artifice here. You think I don’t know Isaac Rapine, the
money-broker, in the Minories. Ah! you old rogue! many a pawn have you
had of me and my acquaintance, which was never redeemed.” Isaac,
finding it was in vain to disguise himself, offered twenty shillings
for a discharge, which she absolutely refused under fifty pounds: at
last, however, she was brought down to five, which he paid with great
reluctancy, rather than be prosecuted for a rape. After which
accommodation, the sick person made a shift to get into the waggon, and
we set forward in great tranquillity; Strap being accommodated with
Joey’s horse, the driver himself choosing to walk. The morning and
forenoon we were entertained with an account of the valour of Captain
Weazel, who told us he had once knocked down a soldier that made game
of him; tweaked a drawer by the nose, who found fault with his picking
his teeth with a fork, at another time; and that he had moreover
challenged a cheesemonger, who had the presumption to be his rival: for
the truth of which exploits he appealed to his wife. She confirmed
whatever he said, and observed, “The last affair happened that very day
on which I received a love-letter from Squire Gobble, and don’t you
remember, my dear, I was prodigiously sick that very night with eating
ortolans, when my Lord Diddle took notice of my complexion’s being
altered, and my lady was so alarmed that she had well nigh fainted?”
“Yes, my dear,” replied the captain, “you know my lord said to me, with
a sneer, ‘Billy, Mrs. Weazel is certainly breeding.’ And I answered
cavalierly, ‘My lord, I wish I could return the compliment.’ Upon which
the whole company broke out into an immoderate fit of laughter; and my
lord, who loves a repartee dearly, came round and bussed me.” We
travelled in this manner five days, without interruption or meeting
anything worth notice: Miss Jenny, who soon recovered her spirits,
entertaining us every day with diverting songs, of which she could sing
a great number; and rallying her own gallant, who, notwithstanding,
would never be reconciled to her. On the sixth day, while we were about
to sit down to dinner, the innkeeper came and told us, that three
gentlemen, just arrived, had ordered the victuals to be carried to
their apartment, although he had informed them that they were bespoke
by the passengers in the waggon. To which information they had replied,
“the passengers in the waggon might be d—d, their betters must be
served before them; they supposed it would be no hardship on such
travellers to dine upon bread and cheese for one day.” This was a
terrible disappointment to us all; and we laid our heads together how
to remedy it; when Miss Jenny observed that Captain Weazel, being by
profession a soldier, ought in this case to protect and prevent us from
being insulted. But the Captain excused himself, saying, he would not
for all the world be known to have travelled in a waggon! swearing at
the same time, that could he appear with honour, they should eat his
sword sooner than his provision. Upon this declaration, Miss Jenny,
snatching his weapon, drew it, and ran immediately into the kitchen,
where she threatened to put the cook to death if he did not send the
victuals into our chamber immediately. The noise she made brought the
three strangers down, one of whom no sooner perceived her than he
cried, “Ha! Jenny Ramper! what the devil brought thee hither?” “My dear
Jack Rattle!” replied she, running into his arms, “is it you? Then
Weazel may go to hell for a dinner—I shall dine with you.”

They consented to this proposal with a great deal of joy; and we were
on the point of being reduced to a very uncomfortable meal, when Joey,
understanding the whole affair, entered the kitchen with a pitchfork in
his hand, and swore he would be the death of any man who should pretend
to seize the victuals prepared for the waggon. The menace had like to
have produced fatal consequences; the three strangers drawing their
swords, and being joined by their servants, and we ranging ourselves on
the side of Joey; when the landlord, interposing, offered to part with
his own dinner to keep the peace, which was accepted by the strangers;
and we sat down at table without any further molestation. In the
afternoon, I chose to walk along with Joey, and Strap took my place.
Having entered into a conversation with this driver, I soon found him
to be a merry, facetious, good-natured fellow, and withal very arch; he
informed me, that Miss Jenny was a common girl upon the town, who,
falling into company with a recruiting officer, he carried her down in
the stage coach from London to Newcastle, where he had been arrested
for debt, and was now in prison; upon which she was fain to return to
her former way of life, by this conveyance. He told me likewise, that
one of the gentleman’s servants, who were left at the inn, having
accidentally seen Weazel, immediately knew him, and acquainted Joey
with some particulars of his character. That he had served my Lord
Frizzle in quality of valet-de-chambre many years, while he lived
separate from his lady; but, upon their reconciliation, she expressly
insisted upon Weazel’s being turned off, as well as the woman he kept:
when his lordship, to get rid of them both with a good grace, proposed
that he should marry his Mistress, and he would procure a commission
for him in the army: this expedient was agreed to, and Weazel is now,
by his lordship’s interest, ensigned in —’s regiment. I found he and I
had the same sentiments with regard to Weazel’s courage, which he
resolved to put to the trial, by alarming the passengers with the cry
of a ‘highwayman!’ as soon as a horseman should appear.

This scheme we put in practice, towards the dusk, when we descried a
man on horseback approaching us. Joey had no sooner intimated to the
people in the waggon, that he was afraid we should be all robbed than a
general consternation arose: Strap jumped out of the waggon, and hid
himself behind a hedge. The usurer put forth ejaculations, and made a
rustling among the straw, which made us conjecture he had hid something
under it. Mrs. Weazel, wringing her hands uttered lamentable cries: and
the captain, to our great amazement, began to snore; but this artifice
did not succeed; for Miss Jenny, shaking him by the shoulder, bawled
out, “Sdeath! captain, is this a time to snore, when we are going to be
robbed? Get up for shame, and behave like a soldier and man of honour!”
Weazel pretended to be in a great passion for being disturbed, and
swore he would have his nap out if all the highwaymen in England
surrounded him. “D—n my blood! what are you afraid of?” continued he;
at the same time trembling with such agitation that the whole carriage
shook. This singular piece of behaviour incensed Miss Ramper so much
that she cried, “D—n your pitiful soul, you are as arrant a poltroon,
as ever was drummed out of a regiment. Stop the waggon, Joey—let me
out, and by G—d, if I have rhetoric enough, the thief shall not only
take your purse, but your skin also.” So saying she leaped out with
great agility. By this time the horseman came up and happened to be a
gentleman’s servant well known to Joey, who communicated the scheme,
and desired him to carry it on a little further, by going into the
waggon, and questioning those within. The stranger, consenting for the
sake of diversion, approached it, and in a terrible tone demanded, “Who
have we got here?” Isaac replied, with a lamentable voice, “Here’s a
poor miserable sinner, who has got a small family to maintain, and
nothing in the world wherewithal, but these fifteen shillings which if
you rob me of we must all starve together.” “Who’s that sobbing in the
other corner?” said the supposed highwayman. “A poor unfortunate
woman,” answered Mrs. Weazle, “upon whom I beg you, for Christ’s sake,
to have compassion.” “Are you maid or wife,” said he. “Wife, to my
sorrow,” said she. “Who, or where is your husband?” continued he. “My
husband,” replied Mrs. Weazel, “is an officer in the army and was left
sick at the last inn where we dined.” “You must be mistaken, madam,”
said he, “for I myself saw him get into the waggon this afternoon. But
pray what smell is that? Sure your lapdog has befouled himself; let me
catch hold of the nasty cur, I’ll teach him better manners.” Here he
laid hold of one of Weazel’s legs, and pulled him out from under his
wife’s petticoat, where he had concealed himself. The poor trembling
captain, being detected in his inglorious situation, rubbed his eyes,
and affecting to wake out of sleep, cried, “What’s the matter? What’s
the matter?” “The matter is not much,” answered the horseman; “I only
called in to inquire after your health, and so adieu, most noble
captain.” He clapped spurs to his horse, and was out of sight in a
moment.

It was some time before Weazel could recollect himself, but at length
reassuming the big look, he said, “D—n the fellow! why did he ride away
before I had time to ask him how his lord and lady do? Don’t you
remember Tom, my dear?” addressing himself to his wife. “Yes,” replied
she, “I think I do remember something of the fellow, but you know I
seldom converse with people of his station.” “Hey-day!” cried Joey, “do
yaw knaw the young mon, coptain?” “Know him,” said Weazel, “many a time
has he filled a glass of Burgundy for me, at my Lord Trippett’s table.”
“And what may his name be, coptain?” said Joey. “His name!—his name,”
replied Weazel, “is Tom Rinser.” “Waunds,” cried Joey, “a has changed
his own neame then! for I’se lay a wager he was christened John
Trotter.” This observation raised a laugh against the captain, who
seemed very much disconcerted; when Isaac broke silence, and said, “It
is no matter who or what he was, since he has not proved the robber we
suspected, and we ought to bless God for our narrow escape.” “Bless
God,” said Weazel, “bless the devil! for what? Had he been a
highwayman, I should have eaten his blood, body, and guts, before he
had robbed me, or any one in this diligence.” “Ha, ha, ha,” cried Miss
Jenny, “I believe you will eat all you kill, indeed, captain.” The
usurer was so well pleased at the event of this adventure, that he
could not refrain from being severe, and took notice that Captain
Weazel seemed to be a good Christian, for he had armed himself with
patience and resignation, instead of carnal weapons; and worked out his
salvation with fear and trembling. This piece of satire occasioned a
great deal of mirth at Weazel’s expense, who muttered a great many
oaths, and threatened to cut Isaac’s throat. The usurer, taking hold of
this menace, said, “Gentlemen and ladies, I take you all to witness,
that my life is in danger from this bloody-minded officer; I’ll have
him bound over to the peace.” This second sneer produced another laugh
against him, and he remained crestfallen during the remaining part of
our journey.




CHAPTER XIII


Strap and I are terrified by an Apparition—Strap’s Conjecture—the
Mystery explained by Joey—we arrive in London—our Dress and Appearance
described—we are insulted in the Street—an Adventure in an Alehouse—we
are imposed upon by a waggish Footman—set to rights by a
Tobacconist—take Lodgings—dive for a Dinner—an Accident at our Ordinary


We arrived at our inn, supped, and went to bed; but Strap’s distemper
continuing, he was obliged to rise in the middle of the night, and
taking the candle in his hand, which he had left burning for the
purpose, he went down to the house of office, whence in a short time he
returned in a great hurry, with his hair standing on end, and a look
betokening horror and astonishment. Without speaking a word, he set
down the light and jumped into bed behind me, where he lay and trembled
with great violence. When I asked him what was the matter, he replied,
with a broken accent, “God have mercy on us! I have seen the devil!”
Though my prejudice was not quite so strong as his, I was not a little
alarmed at this exclamation, and much more so when I heard the sound of
bells approaching our chamber, and felt my bedfellow cling close to me,
uttering these words, “Christ have mercy upon us; there he comes!” At
that instance a monstrous overgrown raven entered our chamber, with
bells at his feet, and made directly towards our bed. As this creature
is reckoned in our country a common vehicle for the devil and witches
to play their pranks in, I verily believed we were haunted; and, in a
violent fright, shrank under the bedclothes. This terrible apparition
leaped upon the bed, and after giving us several severe dabs with its
beak through the blankets, hopped away, and vanished. Strap and I
recommended ourselves to the protection of heaven with great devotion,
and, when we no longer heard the noise, ventured to peep up and take
breath. But we had not been long freed from this phantom, when another
appeared, that had well nigh deprived us both of our senses. We
perceived an old man enter the room, with a long white beard that
reached to his middle; there was a certain wild peculiarity in his eyes
and countenance that did not savour of this world; and his dress
consisted of a brown stuff coat, buttoned behind and at the wrists,
with an odd-fashioned cap of the same stuff upon his head. I was so
amazed that I had not power to move my eyes from such a ghastly object,
but lay motionless and saw him come straight up to me: when he reached
the bed, he wrung his hands, and cried, with a voice that did not seem
to belong to a human creature, “Where is Ralph?” I made no reply: upon
which he repeated, in an accent still more preternatural, “Where is
Ralpho?” He had no sooner pronounced these words than I heard the sound
of the bells at a distance; which the apparition, having listened to,
tripped away, and left me almost petrified with fear. It was a good
while before I could recover myself so far as to speak; and, when at
length I turned to Strap, I found him in a fit, which, however, did not
last long. When he came to himself, I asked his opinion of what had
happened; and he assured me that the first must certainly be the soul
of some person damned, which appeared by the chain about his legs (for
his fears had magnified the creature to the bigness of a horse, and the
sound of small morice-bells to the clanking of massy chains). As for
the old man, he took it to be the spirit of somebody murdered long ago
in this place, which had power granted to forment the assassin in the
shape of a raven, and that Ralpho was the name of the said murderer.
Although I had not much faith in this interpretation, I was too much
troubled to enjoy any sleep: and in all my future adventures never
passed a night so ill.

In the morning Strap imparted the whole affair to Joey, who, after an
immoderate fit of laughter, explained the matter, by telling him that
the old man was the landlord’s father, who had been an idiot some
years, and diverted himself with a tame raven, which, it seems, had
hopped away from his apartment in the night, and induced him to follow
it to our chamber, where he had inquired after it under the name of
Ralpho.

Nothing remarkable happened during the remaining part of our journey,
which continued six or seven days longer: at length we entered the
great city, and lodged all night at the inn where the waggon put up.
Next morning all the passengers parted different ways, while my
companion and I sallied out to inquire for the member of parliament, to
whom I had a letter of recommendation from Mr. Crab. As we had
discharged our lodging at the inn, Strap took up our baggage and,
marched behind me in the street with the knapsack on his back, as
usual, so that we made a very whimsical appearance. I had dressed
myself to the greatest advantage; that is, put on a clean ruffled
shirt, and my best thread stockings: my hair (which was of the deepest
red) hung down upon my shoulders, as lank and straight as a pound of
candles; and the skirts of my coat reached to the middle of my leg; my
waistcoat and breeches were of the same piece, and cut in the same
taste; and my hat very much resembled a barber’s basin, in the
shallowness of the crown and narrowness of the brim. Strap was habited
in a much less awkward manner: but a short crop-eared wig, that very
much resembled Scrub’s in the play, and the knapsack on his back, added
to what is called a queer phiz, occasioned by a long chin, a hook nose,
and high cheek bones, rendered him, on the whole, a very fit subject of
mirth and pleasantry. As he walked along, Strap, at my desire, inquired
of a carman, whom we met, whereabouts Mr. Cringer lived: and was
answered by a stare, accompanied with the word “Anan!” Upon which I
came up, in order to explain the question, but had the misfortune to be
unintelligible likewise, the carman damning us for a lousy Scotch
guard, whipping his horses with a “Gee ho!” which nettled me to the
quick, and roused the indignation of Strap so far that, after the
fellow was gone a good way, he told me he would fight him for a
farthing.

While we were deliberating upon what was to be done, a hackney
coachman, driving softly along, and perceiving us standing by the
kennel, came up close to us, and calling, “A coach, master!” by a
dexterous management of the reins made his horses stumble in the wet,
and bedaub us all over with mud. After which exploit he drove on,
applauding himself with a hearty laugh, in which several people joined,
to my great mortification; but one, more compassionate than the rest,
seeing us strangers, advised me to go into an alehouse, and dry myself.
I thanked him for his advice, which I immediately complied with; and,
going into the house he pointed out, called for a pot of beer, and sat
down by a fire in the public room where we cleaned ourselves as well as
we could. In the meantime, a wag, who sat in a box, smoking his pipe,
understanding, by our dialect, that we were from Scotland, came up to
me and, with a grave countenance asked how long I had been caught. As I
did not know the meaning of this question, I made no answer; and he
went on, saying it could not be a great while, for my tail was not yet
cut; at the same time taking hold of my hair, and tipping the wink to
the rest of the company, who seemed highly entertained with his wit. I
was incensed at this usage, but afraid of resenting it, because I
happened to be in a strange place, and perceived the person who spoke
to me was a brawny fellow, for whom I thought myself by no means a
match. However, Strap, having either more courage or less caution,
could not put up with the insults I suffered, but told him in a
peremptory tone, “He was an uncivil fellow for making so free with his
betters.” Then the wit going toward him, asked him what he had got in
his knapsack? “Is it oatmeal or brimstone, Sawney?” said he, seizing
him by the chin, which he shook, to the inexpressible diversion of all
present. My companion, feeling himself assaulted in such an opprobrious
manner, disengaged himself in a trice, and lent his antagonist such a
box on the ear as made him stagger to the other side of the room; and,
in a moment, a ring was formed for the combatants. Seeing Strap
beginning to strip, and my blood being heated with indignation, which
banished all other thoughts, I undressed myself to the skin in an
instant, and declared, that as the affront that occasioned the quarrel
was offered to me, I would fight it out myself; upon which one or two
cried out, “That’s a brave Scotch boy; you shall have fair play.” His
assurance gave me fresh spirits, and, going up to my adversary, who by
his pale countenance did not seem much inclined to the battle, I struck
him so hard on the stomach, that he reeled over a bench, and fell to
the ground. Then I attempted to keep him down, in order to improve my
success, according to the manner of my own country, but was restrained
by the spectators, one of whom endeavoured to raise up my opponent, but
in vain; for he protested he would not fight, for he was not quite
recovered of a late illness. I was very well pleased with this excuse,
and immediately dressed myself, having acquired the good opinion of the
company for my bravery, as well as of my comrade Strap, who shook me by
the hand, and wished me joy of the victory.

After having drunk our pot, and dried our clothes, we inquired of the
landlord if he knew Mr. Cringer, the member of parliament, and were
amazed at his replying in the negative; for we imagined he must be
altogether as conspicuous here as in the borough he represented; but he
told us we might possibly hear of him as we passed along. We betook
ourselves therefore to the street, where seeing a footman standing at
the door, we made up to him, and asked if he knew where our patron
lived? This member of the particoloured fraternity, surveying us both
very minutely, said he knew Mr. Cringer very well, and bade us turn
down the first street on our left, then turn to the right, and then to
the left again, after which perambulation we would observe a lane,
through which we must pass, and at the other end we should find an
alley that leads to another street, where we should see the sign of the
Thistle and Three Pedlars, and there he lodged. We thanked him for his
information, and went forwards, Strap telling me, that he knew this
person to be an honest friendly man by his countenance, before he
opened his mouth; in which opinion I acquiesced, ascribing his good
manners to the company he daily saw in the house where he served.

We followed his directions punctually, in turning to the left, and to
the right, and to the left again; but instead of seeing a lane before
us, found ourselves at the side of the river, a circumstance that
perplexed us not a little; and my fellow-traveller ventured to
pronounce, that we had certainly missed our way. By this time we were
pretty much fatigued with our walk, and not knowing how to proceed, I
went into a small snuff-shop hard by, encouraged by the sign of the
Highlander, where I found, to my inexpressible satisfaction, the
shopkeeper was my countryman. He was no sooner informed of our
peregrination, and the directions we had received from the footman,
than he informed us we had been imposed upon, telling us, Mr. Cringer
lived in the other end of the town and that it would be to no purpose
for us to go thither to-day, for by that time he was gone to the House.
I then asked, if he could recommend us a lodging. He really gave us a
line to one of his acquaintance who kept a chandler’s shop not far from
St. Martin’s Lane; there we hired a bed-room, up two pair of stairs, at
the rate of two shillings per week, so very small, that when the bed
was let down, we were obliged to carry out every other piece of
furniture that belonged to the apartment, and use the bedstead by way
of chairs. About dinner-time, our landlord asked how we proposed to
live? to which interrogation we answered, that we would be directed by
him. “Well, then,” says he, “there are two ways of eating in this town
for people of your condition—the one more creditable and expensive than
the other: the first is to dine at an eating-house frequented by
well-dressed people only; and the other is called diving, practised by
those who are either obliged or inclined to live frugally.” I gave him
to understand that, provided the last was not infamous, it would suit
much better with our circumstances than the other. “Infamous!” cried
he, “not at all; there are many creditable people, rich people, ay, and
fine people, that dive every day. I have seen many a pretty gentleman
with a laced waistcoat dine in that manner very comfortably for three
pence halfpenny, and go afterwards to the coffee-house, where he made a
figure with the best lord in the land; but your own eyes shall bear
witness—I will go along with you to-day and introduce you.”

He accordingly conducted us to a certain lane, where stopping, he bade
us observe him, and do as he did, and, walking a few paces, dived into
a cellar and disappeared in an instant. I followed his example, and
descending very successfully, found myself in the middle of a cook’s
shop, almost suffocated with the steams of boiled beef, and surrounded
by a company of hackney coachmen, chairmen, draymen, and a few footmen
out of place or on board-wages; who sat eating shin of beef, tripe,
cow-heel, or sausages, at separate boards, covered with cloths which
turned my stomach. While I stood in amaze, undetermined whether to sit
down or walk upwards again, Strap, in his descent, missing one of the
stops, tumbled headlong into this infernal ordinary, and overturned the
cook as she carried a porringer of soup to one of the guests. In her
fall, she dashed the whole mess against the legs of a drummer belonging
to the foot-guards, who happened to be in her way, and scalded him so
miserably, that he started up, and danced up and down, uttering a
volley of execrations that made my hair stand on end.

While he entertained the company in this manner, with an eloquence
peculiar to himself, the cook got up, and after a hearty curse on the
poor author of this mischance, who lay under the table with a woful
countenance, emptied a salt-cellar in her hand, and, stripping down the
patient’s stocking, which brought the skin along with it, applied the
contents to the sore. This poultice was scarce laid on, when the
drummer, who had begun to abate of his exclamations, broke forth into
such a hideous yell as made the whole company tremble, then, seizing a
pewter pint pot that stood by him, squeezed the sides of it together,
as if it had been made of pliant leather, grinding his teeth at the
same time with a most horrible grin. Guessing the cause of this violent
transport, I bade the woman wash off the salt, and bathe the part with
oil, which she did, and procured him immediate ease. But here another
difficulty occurred, which was no other than the landlady’s insisting
on his paying for the pot he had rendered useless. He said, he would
pay for nothing but what he had eaten, and bade her be thankful for his
moderation, or else he would prosecute her for damages. Strap,
foreseeing the whole affair would lie at his door, promised to satisfy
the cook, and called for a dram of gin to treat the drummer, which
entirely appeased him, and composed all animosities. After this
accommodation, our landlord and we sat down at a board, and dined upon
shin of beef most deliciously; our reckoning amounting to twopence
halfpenny each, bread and small beer included.




CHAPTER XIV


We visit Strap’s friend—a description of him—his advice—we go to Mr.
Cringer’s house—are denied admittance—an Accident befalls Strap—his
behaviour thereupon—an extraordinary adventure occurs, in the course of
which I lose all my money


In the afternoon my companion proposed to call at his friend’s house,
which, we were informed, was in the neighbourhood, whither we
accordingly went, and were so lucky as to find him at home. This
gentleman, who had come from Scotland three or four years before, kept
a school in town, where he taught the Latin, French, and Italian
languages; but what he chiefly professed was the pronunciation of the
English tongue, after a method more speedy and uncommon than any
practised heretofore, and, indeed, if his scholars spoke like their
master, the latter part of his undertaking was certainly performed to a
tittle: for although I could easily understand every word of what I had
heard hitherto since I entered England, three parts in four of his
dialect were as unintelligible to me as if he had spoken in Arabic or
Irish. He was a middle-sized man, and stooped very much, though not
above the age of forty; his face was frightfully pitted with the
small-pox, and his mouth extended from ear to ear. He was dressed in a
night-gown of plaid, fastened about his middle with a sergeant’s old
sash, and a tie-periwig with a foretop three inches high, in the
fashion of King Charles the Second’s reign.

After he had received Strap, who was related to him, very courteously,
he inquired of him who I was; and being informed, he took me by the
hand, telling me he was at school with my father. When he understood my
situation, he assured me that he would do me all the service in his
power, both by his advice and otherwise, and while he spoke these words
eyed me with great attention, walking round me several times, and
muttering, “Oh, dear! Oh, dear! fat a saight is here!” I soon guessed
the reason of his ejaculation, and said, “I suppose, sir, you are not
pleased with my dress.” “Dress,” answered he, “you may caal it fat you
please in your country, but I vow to Gad ’tis a masquerade here. No
Christian will admit such a figure into his house. Upon my conscience,
I wonder the dogs did not hunt you. Did you pass through St. James’s
market? Bless my eyesaight! you are like a cousin-german of an
ourangoutang.” I began to be a little serious at this discourse, and
asked him, if he thought I should obtain entrance to-morrow at the
house of Mr. Cringer, on whom I chiefly depended for an introduction
into business? “Mr. Cringer, Mr. Cringer,” replied he, scratching his
cheek, “may be a very honest gentleman—I know nothing to the contrary;
but is your sole dependence upon him? Who recommended you to him?” I
pulled out Mr. Crab’s letter, and told him the foundation of my hopes,
at which he stared at me, and repeated “Oh dear! Oh dear!” I began to
conceive bad omens from this behaviour of his, and begged he would
assist me with his advice, which he promised to give very frankly; and
as a specimen, directed us to a periwig warehouse in the neighbourhood,
in order to be accommodated; laying strong injunctions on me not to
appear before Mr. Cringer till I had parted with my carroty locks,
which, he said, were sufficient to beget an antipathy against me in all
mankind. And as we were going to pursue this advice, he called me back
and bade me be sure to deliver my letter into Mr. Cringer’s own hand.

As we walked along, Strap triumphed greatly in our reception with his
friend, who, it seems, had assured him he would in a day or two provide
for him with some good master; “I and now,” says he, “I you will see
how I will fit you with a wig. There’s ne’er a barber in London (and
that’s a bold word) can palm a rotten caul, or a pennyweight of dead
hair, upon me.” And, indeed, this zealous adherent did wrangle so long
with the merchant, that he was desired twenty times to leave the shop,
and see if he could get one cheaper elsewhere. At length I made choice
(if a good handsome bob), for which I paid ten shillings, and returned
to our lodging, where Strap in a moment rid me of that hair which had
given the schoolmaster so much offence.

We got up next day betimes, having been informed that Mr. Cringer gave
audience by candle-light to all his dependents, he himself being
obliged to attend the levee of my Lord Terrier at break of day, because
his lordship made one at the minister’s between eight and nine o’clock.
When we came to Mr. Cringer’s door, Strap, to give me all instance of
his politeness, ran to the knocker, which he employed so loud and so
long, that he alarmed the whole street; and a window opening in the
second story of the next house, a vessel was discharged upon him so
successfully, that the poor barber was wet to the skin, while I, being
luckily at some distance, escaped the unsavoury deluge. In the
meantime, a footman opening the door, and seeing nobody in the street
but us, asked, with a stern countenance, if it was I who made such a
noise, and what I wanted. I told him I had business with his master,
whom I desired to see. Upon which he slapped the door in my face,
telling me I must learn better manners before I could have access to
his master. Vexed at this disappointment, I turned my resentment
against Strap, whom I sharply reprimanded for his presumption; but he,
not in the least regarding what I said, wrung the wet out of his
periwig, and lifting up a large stone, flung it with such force against
the street door of that house from whence he had been bedewed, that the
lock giving way, it flew wide open, and he took to his heels, leaving
me to follow him as I could. Indeed, there was no time for
deliberation; I therefore pursued him with all the speed I could exert,
until we found ourselves about the dawn in a street we did not know.
Here, as we wandered along gaping about, a very decent sort of a man,
passing by me, stopped of a sudden and took up something, which having
examined, he turned and presented to me with these words: “Sir, you
have dropped half-a-crown.” I was not a little surprised at this
instance of honesty, and told him it did not belong to me; but he bade
me recollect, and see if all my money was safe; upon which I pulled out
my purse, for I had bought one since I came to town, and, reckoning my
money in my hand, which was now reduced to five guineas seven shillings
and twopence, assured him I had lost nothing. “Well, then, says he, so
much the better; this is a godsend, and as you two were present when I
picked it up, you are entitled to equal shares with me.” I was
astonished at these words, and looked upon this person to be a prodigy
of integrity, but absolutely refused to take any part of the sum.
“Come, gentlemen,” said he, “you are too modest—I see you are
strangers, but you shall give me leave to treat you with a whet this
cold raw morning.” I would have declined the invitation, but Strap
whispered to me that the gentleman would be affronted, and I complied.
“Where shall we go?” said the stranger; “I am quite ignorant of this
part of the town.” I informed him that we were in the same situation;
upon which he proposed to go into the first public-house we should find
open; and as we walked together, he began in this manner: “I find by
your tongues you are from Scotland, gentlemen; my grandmother by the
father’s side was of your country, and I am so prepossessed in its
favour, that I never meet a Scotchman but my heart warms. The Scots are
very brave people. There is scarce a great family in the kingdom that
cannot boast of some exploits performed by its ancestors many hundred
years ago. There’s your Douglasses, Gordons, Campbells, Hamiltons. We
have no such ancient families here in England. Then you are all very
well educated. I have known a pedlar talk in Greek and Hebrew as well
as if they had been his mother-tongue. And for honesty—I once had a
servant, his name was Gregor Macgregor, I would have trusted him with
untold gold.”

This eulogium of my native country gained my affections so strongly,
that I believe I could have gone to death to serve the author; and
Strap’s eyes swam in tears. At length, as we passed through a dark
narrow lane, we perceived a public-house, which we entered, and found a
man sitting by the fire, smoking a pipe, with a pint of purl before
him. Our new acquaintance asked us if ever we had drunk egg-flip? To
which question we answering in the negative, he assured us of a regale,
and ordered a quart to be prepared, calling for pipes and tobacco at
the same time. We found this composition very palateable, and drank
heartily; the conversation, which was introduced by the gentleman,
turning upon the snares that young inexperienced people are exposed to
in this metropolis. He described a thousand cheats that are daily
practised upon the ignorant and unwary, and warned us of them with so
much good nature and concern, that we blessed the opportunity which
threw us in his way. After we had put the can about for some time, our
new friend began to yawn, telling us he had been up all night with a
sick person; and proposed we should have recourse to some diversion to
keep him awake. “Suppose,” said he, “we should take a hand at whist for
pastime. But let me see: that won’t do, there’s only three of us; and I
cannot play at any other game. The truth is, I seldom or never play,
but out of complaisance, or at such a time as this, when I am in danger
of falling asleep.”

Although I was not much inclined to gaming, I felt no aversion to pass
an hour or two at cards with a friend; and knowing that Strap
understood as much of the matter as I, made no scruple of saying, “I
wish we could find a fourth hand.” While we were in this perplexity the
person whom we found in the house at our entrance, overhearing our
discourse, took the pipe from his mouth very gravely, and accosted us
thus: “Gentlemen, my pipe is out, you see,” shaking the ashes into the
fire, “and rather than you should be balked, I don’t care if I take a
hand with you for a trifle—but remember I won’t play for anything of
consequence.” We accepted his proffer with pleasure. Having cut for
partners, it fell to my lot to play with him against our friend and
Strap, for threepence a game. We were so successful, that in a short
time I was half-a-crown gainer; when the gentleman whom we had met in
the street observing he had no luck to-day, proposed to leave off, or
change partners. By this time I was inflamed with my good fortune and
the expectation of improving it, as I perceived the two strangers
played but indifferently; therefore I voted for giving him his revenge:
and cutting again, Strap and I, to our mutual satisfaction, happened to
be partners. My good fortune attended me still, and in less than an
hour we had got thirty shillings of their money, for as they lost they
grew the keener, and doubled stakes every time. At last the inconstant
goddess began to veer about, and we were very soon stripped of all our
gains, and about forty shillings of our own money. This loss mortified
me extremely, and had a visible effect on the muscles of Strap’s face,
which lengthened apace; but our antagonists perceiving our condition,
kindly permitted us to retrieve our loss, and console ourselves with a
new acquisition. Then my companion wisely suggested it was time to be
gone; upon which the person who had joined us in the house began to
curse the cards, and muttered that we were indebted to fortune only for
what we had got, no part of our success being owing to our good play.
This insinuation nettled me so much that I challenged him to a game at
piquet for a crown: and he was with difficulty persuaded to accept the
invitation. This contest ended in less than an hour to my inexpressible
affliction, who lost every shilling of my own money, Strap absolutely
refusing to supply me with a sixpence.

The gentleman at whose request we had come in, perceiving by my
disconsolate looks the situation of my heart, which well nigh burst
with grief and resentment, when the other stranger got up, and went
away with my money, began in this manner:—“I am truly afflicted at your
bad luck, and would willingly repair it, were it in my power. But what
in the name of goodness could provoke you to tempt your fate so long?
It is always a maxim with gamesters to pursue success as far us it will
go, and to stop whenever fortune shifts about. You are a young man, and
your passions are too impetuous; you must learn to govern them better.
However, there is no experience like that which is bought; you will be
the better for this the longest day you have to live. As for the fellow
who has got your money, I don’t half like him. Did not you see me tip
you the wink to leave off in time?” I answered, “No.” “No,” continued
he; “you was too eager to mind anything but the game. But, harkee,”
said he in a whisper, “are you satisfied of that young man’s honesty?
His looks are a little suspicious—but I may be mistaken; he made a
great many grimaces while he stood behind you, this is a very wicked
town.” I told him I was very well convinced of my comrade’s integrity
and, that the grimaces he mentioned were doubtless owing to his anxiety
of my loss. “Oh ho! if that be the case, I ask his pardon. Landlord,
see what’s to pay.” The reckoning amounted to eighteenpence, which,
having discharged, the gentleman shook us both by the hand, and, saying
he should be very glad to see us again, departed.




CHAPTER XV


Strap moralises—presents his purse to me—we inform our landlord of our
misfortune—he unravels the mystery—I present myself to Cringer—he
recommends and turns me over to Mr. Staytape—I become acquainted with a
fellow dependent, who explains the character of Cringer and
Staytape—and informs me of the method to be pursued at the Navy Office
and Surgeons’ Hall—Strap is employed


In our way to our lodging, after a profound silence on both sides,
Strap, with a hideous groan, observed that we had brought our pigs to a
fine market. To this observation I made no reply, and he went on: “God
send us well out of this place; we have not been in London eight and
forty hours, and I believe we have met with eight and forty thousand
misfortunes. We have been jeered, reproached, buffeted, and at last
stript of our money; and I suppose by and bye we shall be stript of our
skins. Indeed as to the money part of it, that was owing to our own
folly.—Solomon says, ‘Bray a fool in a mortar, and he will never be
wise.’ Ah! God help us, an ounce of prudence is worth a pound of gold.”
This was no time for him to tamper with my disposition, already mad
with my loss, and inflamed with resentment against him for having
refused me a little money to attempt to retrieve it. I therefore turned
towards him with a stern countenance, and asked, who he called fool?
Being altogether unaccustomed to such looks from me, he stood still,
and stared in my face for some time; then, with some confusion,
uttered, “Fool! I called nobody fool but myself; I am sure I am the
greatest fool of the two, for being so much concerned at other people’s
misfortunes; but ‘Nemo omnibus horis sapit’—that’s all, that’s all.”
Upon which a silence ensued, which brought us to our lodging, where I
threw myself upon the bed in an agony of despair, resolved to perish
rather than apply to my companion, or any other body, for relief; but
Strap, who knew my temper, and whose heart bled within him for my
distress, after some pause came to the bedside, and, putting a leathern
purse into my hand, burst into tears, crying, “I know what you think,
but I scorn your thought. There’s all I have in the world, take it, and
I’ll perhaps get more for you before that be done. If not, I’ll beg for
you, steal for you, go through the wide world with you, and stay with
you; for though I be a poor cobbler’s son, I am no scout.” I was so
much touched with the generous passion of this poor creature, that I
could not refrain from weeping also, and we mingled our tears together
for some time. Upon examining the purse, I found in it two half-guineas
and half-a-crown, which I would have returned to him, saying, he knew
better than I how to manage it, but he, absolutely refused my proposal
and told me it was more reasonable and decent that he should depend
upon me, who was a gentleman, than that I should be controlled by him.

After this friendly contest was over, and our minds more at ease, we
informed our landlord of what had happened to us, taking care to
conceal the extremity to which we were reduced. He no sooner heard the
story, than he assured us we had been grievously imposed upon by a
couple of sharpers, who were associates; and that this polite, honest,
friendly, humane person, who had treated us so civilly, was no other
than a rascally money-dropper, who made it his business to decoy
strangers in that manner to one of his own haunts, where an accomplice
or two were always waiting to assist in pillaging the prey he had run
down. Here the good man recounted a great many stories of people who
has been seduced, cheated, pilfered, beat—nay, even murdered by such
villains. I was confounded at the artifice and wickedness of mankind;
and Strap, lifting up his eyes and hands to heaven, prayed that God
would deliver him from such scenes of iniquity, for surely the devil
had set up his throne in London. Our landlord being curious to know
what reception we had met with at Mr. Cringer’s, we acquainted him with
the particulars, at which he shook his head, and told us we had not
gone the right way to work; that there was nothing to be done with a
member of parliament without a bribe; that the servant was commonly
infected with the master’s disease, and expected to be paid for his
work, as well as his betters. He therefore advised me to give the
footman a shilling the next time I should desire admittance to my
patron, or else I should scarce find an opportunity to deliver my
letter. Accordingly, next morning, when the door was opened, I slipped
a shilling into his hand, and told him I had a letter for his master. I
found the good effect of my liberality; for the fellow let me in
immediately, and, taking the letter out of my hand, desired me to wait
in a kind of passage for an answer. In this place I continued standing
for three-quarters-of-an-hour, during which time I saw a great many
young fellows whom I formerly knew in Scotland pass and repass, with an
air of familiarity, in their way to and from the audience-chamber;
while I was fain to stand shivering in the cold, and turn my back to
them that they might not perceive the lowness of my condition. At
length, Mr. Cringer came out to see a young gentleman to the door, who
was no other than Squire Gawky, dressed in a very gay suit of clothes;
at parting Mr. Cringer shook him by the hand and told him he hoped to
have the pleasure of his company at dinner. Then turning about towards
me, asked what were my commands? When he understood I was the person
who had brought the letter from Mr. Crab, he affected to recollect my
name, which, however, he pretended he could not do till he had
consulted the letter again; to save him the trouble, I told him my name
was Random. Upon which he went on, “Ay, ay, Random, Random, Random—I
think I remember the name:” and very well he might, for this very
individual, Mr. Cringer, had many a time rode before my grandfather’s
cloak-bag, in quality of a footman. “Well,” says he, “you propose to go
on board a man-of-war as surgeon’s mate.” I replied by a low bow. “I
believe it will be a difficult matter,” continued he, “to procure a
warrant, there being already such a swarm of Scotch surgeons at the
Navy Office, in expectation of the next vacancy, that the commissioners
are afraid of being torn to pieces, and have actually applied for a
guard to protect them. However, some ships will soon be put in
commission, and then we shall see what’s to be done.” So saying, he
left me, exceedingly mortified at the different reception Mr. Gawky and
I had met with from this upstart, proud, mean member, who, I imagined,
would have been glad of an opportunity to be grateful for the
obligations he owed to my family.

At my return, I was surprised with the agreeable news of Strap’s being
employed, on the recommendation of his friend, the schoolmaster, by a
periwig-maker in the neighbourhood, who allowed him five shillings per
week besides bed and board. I continued to dance attendance every other
morning at the levee of Mr. Cringer, during a fortnight; in which time
I became acquainted with a young fellow of my own country and
profession, who also depended on the member’s interest, but was treated
with much more respect than I, both by the servants and master, and
often admitted into a parlour, where there was a fire for the
convenience of the better sort of those who waited for him. Thither I
was never permitted to penetrate, on account of my appearance, which
was not at all fashionable; but was obliged to stand blowing my fingers
in a cold lobby, and take the first opportunity of Mr. Cringer’s going
to the door to speak with him.

One day, while I enjoyed this occasion a person was introduced, whom
Mr. Cringer no sooner saw, than, running towards him, he saluted him
with a low bow to the very ground, and afterwards shaking him by the
hand with great heartiness and familiarity, called him his good friend,
and asked very kindly after Mrs. Staytape and the young ladies; then,
after a whisper, which continued some minutes, wherein I overheard the
word ‘honour’ repeated several times with great emphasis, Mr. Cringer
introduced me to this gentleman, as to a person whose advice and
assistance I might depend upon; and having given me his direction,
followed me to the door, where he told me I need not give myself the
trouble to call at his house any more, for Mr. Staytape would do my
business. At that instant my fellow-dependent, coming out after me,
overheard the discourse of Mr. Cringer, and, making up to me in the
street, accosted me very civilly: this address I looked upon as no
small honour, considering the figure he made, for he was dressed in a
blue frock with a button, a green silk waistcoat, trimmed with gold,
black velvet breeches, white silk stockings, silver buckles, a
gold-laced hat, a spencer-wig, and a silver-hilted hanger, with a fine
clouded can in his hand. “I perceive,” says he, “you are but lately
come from Scotland; pray what may your business with Mr. Cringer be? I
suppose it is no secret and I may possibly give you some advice that
will be serviceable, for I have been surgeon’s second mate on board of
a seventy-gun ship, and consequently know a good deal of the world.”

I made no scruple to disclose my situation, which, when he had learned,
he shook his head, and told me he had been pretty much, in the same
circumstances about a year ago: that he had relied on Cringer’s
promises, until his money (which was considerable) as well as his
credit, was quite exhausted; and when he wrote to his relations for a
fresh supply, instead of money he received nothing but reproaches, and
the epithets of idle, debauched fellow. That after he had waited at the
Navy Office many months for a warrant to no purpose, he was fain to
pawn some of his clothes, which raised a small sum wherewith he bribed
the secretary, who soon procured a warrant for him, notwithstanding he
had affirmed the same day, that there was not one vacancy. That he had
gone on board, where he remained nine months, at the end of which the
ship was put out of commission, and he said the company were to be paid
off in Broad Street the very next day. That relations being reconciled
to him, had charged him to pay his devoirs regularly to Mr. Cringer,
who had informed them by letter that his interest alone had procured
the warrant; in obedience to which command he came to his levee every
morning; as I saw, though he looked upon him to be a very pitiful
scoundrel. In conclusion, he asked me if I had yet passed at Surgeons’
Hall? To which question I answered, I did not so much as know it was
necessary. “Necessary:” cried he, “Oh then I find I must instruct you:
come along with me, and I’ll give you information about that matter.”
So Saying, he carried me into an ale-house, where I called for some
beer, and bread and cheese, on which we breakfasted. While we sat in
this place, he told me I must first go to the Navy Office, and write to
the Board, desiring them to order a letter for me to Surgeon’s Hall,
that I might be examined, touching my skill in surgery. That the
surgeons, after having examined me, would give me my qualification
sealed up in form of a letter directed to the commissioners, which
qualification I must deliver to the secretary of the Board, who would
open it in my presence, and read the contents; after which I must
employ my interest to be provided for as soon as possible. That the
expense of his qualification for second mate of a third-rate, amounted
to thirteen shillings, exclusive of the warrant, which cost him
half-a-guinea and half-a-crown, besides a present to the secretary,
which consisted of a three-pound twelve piece. This calculation was
like a thunderbolt to me, whose whole fortune did not amount to twelve
shillings. I accordingly made him acquainted with this part of my
distress, after having thanked him for his information and advice. He
condoled me on this occasion; but bade me be of good cheer, for he had
conceived a friendship for me, and would make all things easy. He was
ran out at present, but to-morrow or next day, he was certain of
receiving a considerable sum; of which he would lend me what would be
sufficient to answer my exigencies. This frank declaration pleased me
so much, that I pulled out my purse, and emptied it before him, begging
him to take what he pleased for pocket-expense, until he should receive
his own money. With a good deal of pressing, he was prevailed upon to
take five shillings telling me that he might have what money he wanted
at any time for the trouble of going into the city; but as he had met
with me, he would defer his going thither till tomorrow, when I should
go along with him, and he would put me in the way of acting for myself,
without a servile dependence on that rascal Cringer, much less on the
tailor to whom he heard him turn me over. “How!” cried I, “is Mr.
Staytape a tailor.” “No less, I assure you,” answered he, “and, I
confess, more likely to serve you than the member; for, provided you
can entertain him with politics and conundrums, you may have credit
with him for as many and as rich clothes as you please.” I told him, I
was utterly ignorant of both, and so incensed at Cringer’s usage, that
I would never set foot within his door again.

After a good deal more conversation, my new acquaintance and I parted,
having made an appointment to meet next day at the same place; in order
to set out for the city. I went immediately to Strap and related
everything which had happened, but he did not at all approve of my
being so forward to lend money to a stranger, especially as we had
already been so much imposed upon by appearances. “However,” said he,
“if you are sure he is a Scotchman, I believe you are safe.”




CHAPTER XVI


My new acquaintance breaks an appointment—I proceed, by myself, to the
Navy Office—address me to a person there, who assists me with
advice—write to the Board, they grant me a letter to the Surgeons at
the Hall—am informed of the beau’s name and character—find him—he makes
me his confidant in an amour—desires me to pawn my linen for his
occasions—recover what I lent him—some curious observations on Strap on
that occasion—his vanity.


In the morning I rose and went to the place of rendezvous, where I
waited two hours in vain, and was so exasperated against him for
breaking his appointment, that I set out for the city by myself, in
hope of finding the villain, and being revenged on him for his breach
of promise. At length I found myself at the Navy Office, which I
entered, and saw crowds of young fellows walking below, many of whom
made no better appearance than myself. I consulted the physiognomy of
each, and at last made up to one whose countenance I liked, and asked,
if he could instruct me in the form of the letter which was to be sent
to the Board to obtain an order for examination? He answered me in
broad Scotch, that he would show me the copy of what he had writ for
himself, by direction of another who know the form, and accordingly
pulled it out of his pocket for my perusal; and told me that, if I was
expeditious, I might send it into the Board before dinner, for they did
no business in the afternoon. He then went with me to coffee-house hard
by, where I wrote the letter, which was immediately delivered to the
messenger, who told me I might expect an order to-morrow about the same
time.

Having transacted this piece of business, my mind was a good deal
composed; and as I had met with so much civility from the stranger, I
desired further acquaintance with him, fully resolved, however, not to
be deceived by him so much to my prejudice as I had been by the beau.
He agreed to dine with me at the cook’s shop which I frequented; and on
our way thither carried me to ’Change, where I was in hopes of finding
Mr. Jackson (for that was the name of the person who had broke his
appointment), I sought him there to no purpose, and on our way towards
the other end of the town imparted to my companion his behaviour
towards me; upon which he gave me to understand, that he was no
stranger to the name of Bean Jackson (so he was called at the Navy
Office), although he did not know him personally; that he had the
character of a good-natured careless fellow, who made no scruple of
borrowing from any that would lend; that most people who knew him
believed he had a good principle at bottom, but his extravagance was
such, he would probably never have it in his power to manifest the
honesty of his intention. This made me sweat for my five shillings,
which I nevertheless did not altogether despair of recovering, provided
I could find out the debtor.

This young man likewise added another circumstance of Squire Jackson’s
history, which was, that being destitute of all means to equip himself
for sea, when he received his last warrant, he had been recommended to
a person who lent him a little money, after he had signed a will
entitling that person to lift his wages when they should become due, as
also to inherit his effects in case of his death. That he was still
under the tutorage and direction of that gentleman, who advanced him
small sums from time to time upon this security, at the rate of fifty
per cent. But at present his credit was very low, because his funds
would do little more than pay what he had already received, this
moderate interest included. After the stranger (whose name was
Thompson) had entertained me with this account of Jackson, he informed
me that he himself had passed for third mate of a third-rate, about
four months ago; since which time he had constantly attended at the
Navy Office, in hope of a warrant, having been assured from the
beginning, both by a Scotch member, and one of the commissioners to
whom the member recommended him, that he should be put into the first
vacancy; notwithstanding which promise, he had the mortification to see
six or seven appointed in the same station almost every week—that now
being utterly impoverished, his sole hope consisted in the promise of a
friend lately come to town, to lend him a small matter, for a present
to the secretary; without which he was persuaded he might wait a
thousand years to no purpose. I conceived a mighty liking for this
young fellow, which (I believe) proceeded from the similitude of our
fortunes. We spent the whole day together; and as he lived at Wapping I
desired him to take a share of my bed.

Next day we returned to the Navy Office, where, after being called
before the Board, and questioned about the place of my nativity and
education, they ordered a letter to be made out for me, which, upon
paying half-a-crown to the clerk, I received, and delivered into the
hands of the clerk at Surgeons’ Hall, together with a shilling for his
trouble in registering my name. By this time my whole stock was
diminished to two shillings, and I saw not the least prospect of
relief, even for present subsistence, much less to enable me to pay the
fees at Surgeons’ Hall for my examination, which would come on in a
fortnight. In this state of perplexity, I consulted Strap, who assured
me he would pawn everything he had in the world, even to his razors,
before I should want: but this expedient I absolutely rejected, telling
him, I would a thousand times rather list for a soldier, of which I had
some thoughts, than be any longer a burden to him. At the word soldier,
he grew pale as death, and begged on his knees I would think no more of
that scheme. “God preserve us all in our right wits!” cried he, “would
you turn soldier, and perhaps be sent abroad against the Spaniards,
where you must stand and be shot at like a woodcock? Heaven keep cold
lead out of my carcase, and let me die in a bed like a Christian, as
all my forefathers have done. What signifies all earthly riches and
honour, if one enjoys not content? and, hereafter, there is no respect
of persons. Better be a poor honest barber with a good conscience, and
time to repent of my sins upon my death-bed, than be cut off (God bless
us!) by a musket-shot, as it were in the very flower of one’s age, in
the pursuit of riches and fame. What signify riches, my dear friend? do
they not make unto themselves wings and fly away? as the wise man
saith. I could also mention many other sayings in contempt of riches,
both from the Bible and other good books; but I know you are not very
fond of those things, I shall only assure you, that if you take on to
be a soldier, I will do the same; and then if we should both be slain,
you will not only have your own blood to answer for, but mine also: and
peradventure the lives of all those whom we shall kill in battle.
Therefore I pray you, consider whether you will sit down contented with
small things and share the fruits of my industry in peace, till
Providence shall send better tidings; or, by your despair, plunge both
our souls and bodies into everlasting perdition, which God of his
infinite mercy forbid!” I could not help smiling at this harangue,
which was delivered with great earnestness, the tears standing in his
eyes all the time, and promised to do nothing of that sort without his
consent and concurrence. He was much comforted with this declaration;
and told me in a few days he should receive a week’s wages, which
should be at my service, but advised me in the meantime to go in quest
of Jackson, and recover, if possible, what he had borrowed of me. I
accordingly trudged about from one end of the town to the other, for
several days, without being able to learn anything certain concerning
him: and, one day being extremely hungry, and allured by the steams
that regaled my nostrils from a boiling cellar, I went down with an
intention to gratify my appetite with a twopennyworth of beef; when to
my no small surprise found Mr. Jackson sitting at dinner with a
footman. He no sooner perceived me than he got up and shook me by the
hands saying, he was glad to see me, for he intended to have called at
my lodgings in the afternoon. I was so well pleased at this rencounter
and the apologies he made for not keeping his appointment, that I
forgot my resentment, and sat down to dinner, with the happy
expectation of not only recovering my own money before we should part,
but also of reaping the benefit of his promise to lend me wherewithal
to pass examination; and this hope my sanguine complexion suggested,
though the account Thompson gave me of him ought to have moderated my
expectation.

When we had feasted sumptuously, he took his leave of the footman, and
adjourned with me to an ale-house hard by, where, after shaking me by
the hand again, he began thus: “I suppose you think me a sad dog, Mr.
Random, and I do confess that appearances are against me. But I dare
say you will forgive me when I tell you, my not coming at the time
appointed was owing to a peremptory message I received from a certain
lady, whom, harkee! (but this is a great secret) I am to marry very
soon. You think this strange, perhaps, but it is not less true for all
that—a five thousand pounder, I’ll assure you, besides expectations.
For my own part, devil take me if I know what any woman can see
engaging about me—but a whim, you know—and then one would not balk
one’s good fortune. You saw that footman who dined with us—he’s one of
the honestest fellows that ever wore livery. You must know it was by
his means I was introduced to her, for he made me first acquainted with
her woman, who is his mistress—ay, many a crown has he and his
sweetheart had of my money—but what of that? things are now brought to
a bearing. I have—(come a little this way) I have proposed marriage,
and the day is fixed—she’s a charming creature, and writes like an
angel! She can repeat all the English tragedies as well as ever a
player in Drury Lane!-and, indeed, is so fond of plays, that to be near
the stage she has taken lodgings in a court hard by the theatre; but
you shall see—you shall see—here’s the last letter she sent me.” With
these words, he put it into my hand, and I read (to the best of my
remembrance) as follows:

‘Dear Kreeter—As you are the animable hopjack of my contemplayshins,
your aydear is infernally skimming before my keymerycal fansee, when
Murfy sends his puppies to the heys of slipping mortals; and when Febus
shines from his merry dying throne; whereupon I shall canseif old time
has lost his pinners, as also cubit his harrows, until thou enjoy sweet
propose in the loafseek harms of thy very faithfool to commend,


Clayrender


Wingar Yard, Drury Lane,
January 12th.’


While I was reading, he seemed to be in an ecstasy, rubbing his hands,
and bursting out into fits of laughter; at last he caught hold of my
hand, and squeezing it, cried, “There—a style for you! What do you
think of this billet-doux?” I answered, “It might be sblime for aught I
knew, for it was altogether above my comprehension.” “Oh, ho!” said he,
“I believe it is—both tender and sublime; she’s a divine creature! and
so doats upon me! Let me see—what shall I do with this money, when I
have once got it into my hands? In the first place, I shall do for you.
I’m a man of few words—-but say no more that’s determined; whether
would you advise me, to purchase some post, by which I may rise in the
state, or lay out my wife’s fortune in land, and retire to the country
at once?” I gave my opinion without hesitation, that he could not do
better than buy an estate and improve; especially since he had already
seen so much of the world. Then I launched out into the praises of a
country life, as described by the poets whose works I had read. He
seemed to relish my advice, but withal told me, that although he had
seen a great deal of the world both at land and sea, having cruised
three whole months in the Channel, yet he should not be satisfied until
he had visited France, which he proposed to do before he should settle;
and to carry his wife along with him. I had nothing to object to his
proposal; and asked how soon he hoped to be happy. “As to that,” he
replied, “nothing obstructs my happiness but the want of a little ready
cash; for you must know, my friend in the city has gone out of town for
a week or two, but I unfortunately missed my pay at Broad Street, by
being detained too long by the dear charmer—but there will be a recall
at Chatham next week, whither the ship’s books are sent, and I have
commissioned a friend in that place to receive the money.” “If that be
all,” said I, “there’s no great harm in deferring your marriage a few
days.” “Yes, faith, but there is,” said he; “you don’t know how many
rivals I have, who would take all advantages against me. I would not
balk the impatience of her passion for the world—the least appearance
of coldness or indifference would ruin all; and such offers don’t occur
every day.”

I acquiesced in this observation, and inquired how he intended to
proceed. At this question he rubbed his chin, and said, “Why, truly, I
must be obliged to some friend or other—do you know nobody that would
lend me a small sum for a day or two?” I assured him, I was such an
utter stranger in London, that I did not believe I could borrow a
guinea if my life depended upon it. “No!” said he, “that’s hard—that’s
hard! I wish I had anything to pawn—upon my soul, you have got
excellent linen (feeling the sleeve of my shirt); how many shirts of
that kind have you got?” I answered, “Six ruffled, and six plain.” At
which he testified great surprise, and declared that no gentleman ought
to have more than four. “How many d’ye think I have got?” continued he;
“but this and another, as I hope to be saved! and I dare say we shall
be able to raise a good sum out of your superfluity: let me see—let me
see—each of these shirts is worth sixteen shillings at a moderate
computation—now, suppose we pawn them for half-price—eight times eight
is sixty-four, that’s three pounds four; that will do—give me your
hand.” “Softly, softly, Mr. Jackson,” said I; “don’t dispose of my
linen without my consent: first pay me the crown you owe me, and then
we shall talk of other matters.” He protested that he had not above one
shilling in his pocket, but that he would pay me out of the first of
the money raised from the shirts. This piece of assurance incensed me
so much that I swore I would not part with him until I had received
satisfaction for what I had lent him; and as for the shirts, I would
not pawn one of them to save him from the gallows.

At this expression he laughed aloud, and then complained it was very
hard that I should refuse him a trifle that would infallibly enable him
not only to make his own fortune but mine also. “You talk of pawning my
shirts,” said I; “suppose you should sell this hanger, Mr. Jackson. I
believe it would fetch a good round sum.” “No, hang it!” said he, “I
can’t appear decently without my hanger, lest it should go.” However,
seeing me inflexible with regard to my linen, he at length unbuckled
his hanger, and, showing me the three blue balls, desired me to carry
it thither and pawn it for two guineas. This office I would by no means
have performed, had I seen any likelihood of having my money otherwise;
but not willing, out of a piece of false delicacy, to neglect the only
opportunity I should perhaps ever have, I ventured into a pawnbroker’s
shop, where I demanded two guineas on the pledge, in the name of Thomas
Williams. “Two guineas!” said the pawnbroker, looking at the hanger;
“this piece of goods has been here several times before for thirty
shillings: however, since I believe the gentleman to whom it belongs
will redeem it, he shall have what he wants; and accordingly he paid me
the money, which I carried to the house where I had left Jackson; and,
calling for change, counted out to him seven and thirty shillings,
reserving the other five for myself.” After looking at the money some
time, he said, “Well! it don’t signify—this won’t do my business; so
you may as well take half-a-guinea, or a whole one, as the five
shillings you have kept.” I thanked him kindly, but refused to accept
of any more than was my due, because I had no prospect of repaying it.
Upon which declaration, he stared in my face, and told me, I was
excessively raw or I would not talk in that manner. “Upon my word,”
cried he, “I have a very bad opinion of a young fellow who won’t borrow
of his friend when he is in want—’tis the sign of a sneaking spirit.
Come, come, Random, give me back the five shillings, and take this
half-guinea, and if ever you are able to pay me, I believe you will: if
not, I shall never ask it.”

When I reflected upon my present necessity, I suffered myself to be
persuaded, and after making my acknowledgments to Mr. Jackson, who
offered to treat me with a play, I returned to my lodgings with a much
better opinion of this gentleman than I had in the morning; and at
night imparted my day’s adventure to Strap, who rejoiced at my good
luck, saying, “I told you if he was a Scotchman you was safe enough—and
who knows but this marriage may make us all. You have heard, I suppose,
as how a countryman of ours, a journeyman baker, ran away with a great
lady of this town, and now keeps his coach. I say nothing; but
yesterday morning as I was shaving a gentleman at his own house, there
was a young lady in the room, and she threw so many sheep’s eyes at a
certain person whom I shall not name, that my heart went knock, knock,
knock, like a fulling mill, and my hand sh-sh-shook so much that I
sliced a piece of skin off the gentleman’s nose; whereby he uttered a
deadly oath, and was going to horsewhip me, when she prevented him, and
made my peace. Is not a journeyman barber as good as a journeyman
baker? The only difference is, the baker uses flour for the belly, and
the barber rises it for the head: and as the head is a more noble
member than the belly, so is a barber more noble than a baker—for
what’s the belly without the head? Besides, I am told, he could neither
read nor write; now you know I can do both, and moreover, speak
Latin—but I will say no more, for I despise vanity—nothing is more vain
than vanity.” With these words, he pulled out of his pocket a
wax-candle’s end, which he applied to his forehead; and upon
examination, I found had combed his own hair over the toupee of his
wig, and was, indeed, in his whole dress, become a very smart shaver. I
congratulated him on his prospect with a satirical smile, which he
understood very well; and, shaking his head, observed, I had very
little faith, but the truth would come to light in spite of my
incredulity.




CHAPTER XVII


I go to Surgeons’ Hall, when I meet Mr. Jackson—am examined—a fierce
dispute arises between two of the examiners—Jackson disguises himself
to attract respect—irises himself to attract respect—is detected—in
hazard of being sent to Bridewell—he treats us at a Tavern—carries us
to a Night-house—A troublesome adventure there—we are committed to the
Round-house—carried before a Justice—his behaviour


With the assistance of this faithful adherent, who gave me almost all
the money he earned, I preserved my half-guinea entire till the day of
examination, when I went with a quaking heart to Surgeons’ Hall, in
order to undergo that ceremony. Among a crowd of young fellows who
walked in the outward hall, I perceived Mr. Jackson, to whom I
immediately went up; and, inquiring into the state of his love affair,
understood it was still undetermined, by reason of his friend’s
absence, and the delay of the recall at Chatham, which put it out of
his power to bring it to a conclusion. I then asked what his business
was in this place; he replied, he was resolved to have two strings to
his bow, that in case the one failed, he might use the other; and, with
this view, he was to pass that night for a higher qualification. At
that instant, a young fellow came out from the place of examination,
with a pale countenance, his lip quivering, and his looks as wild as if
he had seen a ghost. He no sooner appeared, than we all flocked about
him with the utmost eagerness to know what reception he had met with;
which, after some pause, he described, recounting all the questions
they had asked, with the answers he made. In this manner we obliged no
less than twelve to recapitulate, which, now the danger was past, they
did with pleasure, before it fell to my lot: at length the beadle
called my name, with a voice that made me tremble. However, there was
no remedy. I was conducted into a large hall, where I saw about a dozen
of grim faces sitting at a long table: one of whom bade me come
forward, in such an imperious tone, that I was actually for a minute or
two bereft of my senses. The first question he put to me was, “Where
was you born?” To which I answered, “In Scotland.” “In Scotland,” said
he; “I know that very well—we have scarce any other countrymen to
examine here—you Scotchmen have overspread us of late as the locusts
did Egypt. I ask you in what part of Scotland was you born?” I named
the place of my nativity, which he had never heard of; he then
proceeded to interrogate me about my age, the town where I served my
time, with the term of my apprenticeship; and when I informed him that
I served three years only, he fell into a violent passion, swore it was
a shame and a scandal to send such raw boys into the world as surgeons;
that it was great presumption in me, and an affront upon the English,
to pretend sufficient skill in my business, having served so short a
time, when every apprentice in England was bound seven years at least:
that my friends would have done better if they had made me a weaver or
shoemaker; but their pride would have me a gentleman, he supposed, at
any rate, and their poverty could not afford the necessary education.
This exordium did not at all contribute to the recovery of my spirits;
but on the contrary, reduced me to such a situation that I was scarcely
able to stand; which being perceived by a plump gentleman who sat
opposite to me with a skull before him, he said, Mr. Snarler was too
severe upon the young man; and, turning towards me, told me I need not
be afraid, for nobody would do me any harm: then, bidding me take time
to recollect myself, he examined me, touching the operation of the
trepan, and was very well satisfied with my answers. The next person
who questioned me was a wag, who began by asking if I had ever seen
amputation performed; and I replying in the affirmative, he shook his
head and said, “What! upon a dead subject, I suppose?” “If,” continued
he, “during an engagement at sea, a man should be brought to you with
his head shot off, how would you behave?” After some hesitation, I
owned such a case had never come under my observation, neither did I
remember to have seen any method of care proposed for such an accident,
in any of the systems of surgery I had perused.

Whether it was owing to the simplicity of my answer, or the archness of
the question, I know not, but every member at the board deigned to
smile, except Mr. Snarler, who seemed to have very little of the
‘animal risible’ in his constitution. The facetious member, encouraged
by the success of his last joke, went on thus: “Suppose you was called
to a patient of a plethoric habit, who has been bruised by a fall, what
would you do?” I answered, “I would bleed him immediately.” “What!”
said he, “before you had tied up his arm?” But this stroke of wit not
answering his expectation, he desired me to advance to the gentleman
who sat next him; and who, with a pert air, asked, what method of cure
I would follow in wounds of the intestines. I repeated the method of
care as it is prescribed by the best chirurgical writers, which he
heard to an end, and then said with a supercilious smile, “So you think
with such treatment the patient might recover?” I told him I saw
nothing to make me think otherwise. “That may be,” resumed he; “I won’t
answer for your foresight, but did you ever know a case of this kind
succeed?” I acknowledged I did not, and was about to tell him I had
never seen a wounded intestine; but he stopt me, by saying, with some
precipitation, “Nor never will! I affirm that all wounds of the
intestines, whether great or small, are mortal.” “Pardon me, brother,”
says the fat gentleman, “there is very good authority—” Here he was
interrupted by the other with—“Sir, excuse me, I despise all
authority—Nullius in verbo—I stand on my own bottom.” “But sir, sir,”
replied his antagonist, “the reason of the thing shows—” “A fig for
reason,” cries this sufficient member; “I laugh at reason; give me
ocular demonstratio.” The corpulent gentleman began to wax warm, and
observed, that no man acquainted with the anatomy of the parts would
advance such an extravagant assertion. This inuendo enraged the other
so much, that he started up, and in a furious tone exclaimed: “What,
Sir! do you question my knowledge in anatomy?”

By this time, all the examiners had espoused the opinion of one or
other of the disputants, and raised their voices altogether, when the
chairman commanded silence, and ordered me to withdraw. In less than a
quarter of an hour, I was called in again, received my qualification
scaled up, and was ordered to pay five shillings. I laid down my
half-guinea upon the table, and stood some time, until one of them bade
me begone; to this I replied, “I will when I have got my change:” upon
which another threw me five shillings and sixpence, saying, I should
not be a true Scotchman if I went away without my change. I was
afterwards obliged to give three shillings and sixpence to the beadles,
and a shilling to an old woman who swept the hall: this disbursement
sank my finances to thirteen-pence halfpenny, with which I was sneaking
off, when Jackson, perceiving it, came up to me, and begged I would
tarry for him, and he would accompany me to the other end of the town,
as soon as his examination should be over. I could not refuse this to a
person that was so much my friend; but I was astonished at the change
of his dress which was varied in half-an-hour from what I have already
described to a very grotesque fashion. His head was covered with an old
smoke tie-wig that did not boast one crooked hair, and a slouched hat
over it, which would have very well become a chimney-sweeper, or a
dustman; his neck was adorned with a black crape, the ends of which he
had twisted, and fixed in the button-hole of a shabby greatcoat that
wrapped up his whole body; his white silk stockings were converted into
black worsted hose: and his countenance was rendered venerable by
wrinkles, and a beard of his own painting. When I expressed my surprise
at this metamorphosis, he laughed, and told me it was done by the
advice and assistance of a friend, who lived over the way, and would
certainly produce something very much to his advantage; for it gave him
the appearance of age, which never fails of attracting respect. I
applauded his sagacity, and waited with impatience for the effects of
it. At length he was called in; but whether the oddness of his
appearance excited a curiosity more than small in the board, or his
behaviour was not suitable to his figure, I know not, he was discovered
to be an imposter, and put into the hands of the beadle in order to be
sent to Bridewell. So that instead of seeing him come out with a
cheerful countenance, and a surgeon’s qualification in his hand, I
perceived him led through the outer hall as a prisoner; and was very
much alarmed, and anxious to know the occasion; when he called with a
lamentable voice, and a piteous aspect to me, and some others who know
him, “For God’s sake, gentlemen bear witness that I am the same
individual John Jackson who served as surgeon’s second mate on board
the Elizabeth, or else I shall go to Bridewell!”

It would have been impossible for the most austere hermit that ever
lived to have refrained from laughing at his appearance and address: we
therefore indulged ourselves a good while at his expense, and
afterwards pleaded his cause so effectually with the beadle who was
gratified with half-a-crown, that the prisoner was dismissed, and in a
few moments renewed his former gaiety—swearing, since the board had
refused his money, he would spend every shilling before he went to bed,
in treating his friends; at the same time inviting us all to favour him
with our company. It was now ten o’clock at night, and, as I had a
great way to walk through streets that were utterly unknown to me, I
was prevailed on to be of their party, in hopes he would afterwards
accompany me to my lodgings, according to his promise. He conducted me
to his friend’s house, who kept a tavern over the way where we
continued drinking punch, until the liquor mounted up to our heads, and
made us all extremely frolicsome. I, in particular, was so much
elevated, that nothing would serve me but a wench; at which demand
Jackson expressed much joy, and assured me I should have my desire.
before we parted Accordingly, when he had paid the reckoning, we
sallied out, roaring and singing; and were conducted by our leader to a
place of nocturnal entertainment, where Mr. Jackson’s dress attracted
the assiduities of two or three nymphs, who loaded him with caresses,
in return for the arrack punch with which he treated them, till at
length sleep began to exert his power over us all, and our conductor
called “To pay.” When the bill was brought, which amounted to twelve
shillings, he put his hand in his pocket, but might have saved himself
the trouble, for his purse was gone. This accident disconcerted him a
good deal at first; but after some recollection, he seized the two
ladies who sat by him, one in each hand, and swore if they did not
immediately restore his money he would charge a constable with them.
The good lady at the bar, seeing what passed, whispered something to
the drawer, who went out; and then with great composure, asked what was
the matter? Jackson told her he was robbed, and swore if she refused
him satisfaction, he would have her and her female friends committed to
Bridewell. “Robbed!” cried she, “robbed in my house! Gentlemen and
Ladies, I take you all to witness, this person has scandalised my
reputation.” At that instant, seeing the constable and watch enter, she
proceeded “What! you must not only endeavour by your false aspersions
to ruin my character, but even commit an assault upon my family! Mr.
Constable, I charge you with this uncivil person, who has been guilty
of a riot here; I shall take care and bring an action against him for
defamation.”

While I was reflecting on this melancholy event, which had made me
quite sober, one of the ladies, being piqued at some repartee that
passed between us, cried, “They are all concerned!” and desired the
constable to take us all into custody; an arrest which was performed
instantly, to the utter astonishment and despair of us all, except
Jackson, who having been often in such scrapes, was very little
concerned, and charged the constable, in his turn, with the landlady
and her whole bevy; upon which we were carried altogether prisoners to
the round-house, where Jackson after a word of comfort to us, informed
the constable of his being robbed, to which he said he would swear next
morning before the justice. In a little time the constable, calling
Jackson into another room, spoke to him thus: “I perceive that you and
your company are strangers, and am very sorry for your being involved
in such an ugly business. I have known this woman a great while; she
has kept a notorious house in the neighbourhood this many years; and
although often complained of as a nuisance, still escapes through her
interest with the justices, to whom she and all of her employment pay
contribution quarterly for protection. As she charged me with you
first, her complaint will have the preference, and she can procure
evidence to swear whatsoever she shall please to desire of them; so
that, unless you can make it up before morning, you and your companions
may think yourselves happily quit for a month’s hard labour in
Bridewell. Nay, if she should swear a robbery or an assault against
you, you will be committed to Newgate and tried at the next session at
the Old Bailey for your life.” This last piece of information had such
an effect upon Jackson, that he agreed to make it up, provided his
money might be restored. The constable told him, that, instead of
retrieving what he had lost, he was pretty certain it would cost him
some more before they could come to any composition. But, however, he
had compassion on him, and would, if he pleased, sound them about a
mutual release. The unfortunate beau thanked him for his friendship,
and returning to us, acquainted us with the substance of this dialogue;
while the constable, desiring to speak in private with our adversary,
carried her into the next room, and pleaded, our cause so effectually,
that she condescended to make him umpire: he accordingly proposed an
arbitration, to which we gave our assent; and he fined each party in
three shillings, to be laid out in a bowl of punch, wherein we drowned
all animosities, to the inexpressible joy of my two late acquaintances
and me, who had been extremely uneasy ever since Jackson mentioned
Bridewell and Newgate. By the time we had finished our bowl—to which,
by the bye, I had contributed my last shilling—it was morning, and I
proposed to move homeward, when the constable gave me to understand, he
could discharge no prisoners but by order of the justice, before whom
we must appear. This renewed my chagrin, and I cursed the hour in which
I had yielded to Jackson’s invitation.

About nine o’clock, we were escorted to the house of a certain justice
not many miles distant from Covent Garden, who no sooner saw the
constable enter with a train of prisoners at his heels, than he saluted
him as follows: “So Mr. Constable, you are a diligent man. What den of
rogues have you been scouring?” Then looking at us, who appeared very
much dejected, he continued: “Ay, ay, thieves. I see—old offenders; oh,
your humble servant, Mrs. Harridan! I suppose these fellows have been
taken robbing your house. Yes, yes, here’s an old acquaintance of mine.
You have used expedition,” said he to me, “in returning from
transportation; but we shall save you that trouble for the future—the
surgeons will fetch you from your next transportation, at their
expense.” I assured his worship he was mistaken in me, for he had never
seen me in his life before. To this declaration he replied, “How! you
impudent rascal, dare you say so to my face? Do you think I am to be
imposed upon by that northern accent, which you have assumed? But it
shan’t avail you—you shall find me too far north for you. Here, clerk,
write this fellow’s mittimus. His name is Patrick Gaghagan.” Here Mr.
Jackson interposed, and told him I was a Scotchman lately come to town,
descended of a good family, and that my name was Random. The justice
looked upon this assertion as an outrage upon his memory, on which he
valued himself exceedingly; and strutting up to Jackson, with a fierce
countenance, put his hands in his side, and said, “Who are you, sir? Do
you give me the lie? Take notice, gentlemen, here’s a fellow who
affronts me upon the bench but I’ll lay you fast, sirrah, I will—for
notwithstanding your laced jacket, I believe you are a notorious
felon.” My friend was so much abashed at this menace, which was
thundered out with great vociferation, that he changed colour, and
remained speechless. This confusion his worship took for a symptom of
guilt, and, to complete the discovery, continued his threats, “Now, I
am convinced you are a thief—your face discovers it, you tremble all
over, your conscience won’t lie still—you’ll be hanged, sirrah,”
raising his voice, “you’ll be hanged; and happy had it been for the
world, as well as for your own miserable soul, if you had been
detected, and cut off in the beginning of your career. Come hither,
clerk, and take this man’s confession.” I was in an agony of
consternation, when the constable, going into another room with his
worship, acquainted him with the truth of the story; which having
learned, he returned with a smiling countenance, and, addressing
himself to us all, said it was always his way to terrify young people
when they came before him, that his threats might make a strong
impression on their minds, and deter them from engaging in scenes of
riot and debauchery, which commonly ended before the judge. Thus,
having cloaked his own want of discernment under the disguise of
paternal care, we were dismissed, and I found myself as much lightened
as if a mountain had been lifted off my breast.




CHAPTER XVIII


I carry my qualification to the Navy Office—the nature of it—the
behaviour of the Secretary—Strap’s concern for my absence—a battle
betwixt him a blacksmith—the troublesome consequences of it—his
harangue to me—his friend the schoolmaster recommends me to a French
Apothecary, who entertains me as a journeyman


I would most willingly have gone home to sleep, but was told by my
companions, that we must deliver our letters of qualification at the
Navy office, before one o’clock. Accordingly, we went thither, and gave
them to the secretary, who opened and read them, and I was mightily
pleased to find myself qualified for second mate of a third-rate. When
he had stuck them all together on a file, one of our company asked if
there were any vacancies; to which interrogation he answered “No!” Then
I ventured to inquire if many ships were to be put in commission soon.
At which question he surveyed me with a look of ineffable contempt;
and, pushing us out of his office, locked the door without deigning us
another word. We went down stairs, and conferred together on our
expectations, when I understood that each of them had been recommended
to one or other of the commissioners, and each of them promised the
first vacancy that should fall; but that none of them relied solely
upon that interest, without a present to the secretary, with whom some
of the commissioners went snacks. For which reason, each of them had
provided a small purse; and I was asked what I proposed to give. This
was a vexatious question to me who (far from being in a capacity to
gratify a ravenous secretary) had not wherewithal to purchase a dinner.
I therefore answered, I had not yet determined what to give; and
sneaked off toward my own lodging, lamenting my fate all the way, and
inveighing with much bitterness against the barbarity of my
grandfather, and the sordid avarice of my relations, who left me a prey
to contempt and indigence.

Full of these disagreeable reflections, I arrived at the house where I
lodged, and relieved my landlord from great anxiety on my account; for
this honest man believed I had met with some dismal accident, and that
he never should see me again. Strap, who had come to visit me in the
morning, understanding I had been abroad all night, was almost
distracted, and after having obtained leave of his master, had gone in
quest of me, though he was even more ignorant of the town than I. Not
being willing to inform the landlord of my adventure, I told him I had
met an acquaintance at Surgeons’ Hall, with whom I spent the evening
and night; but being very much infested with bugs, I had not slept
much, and therefore intended to take a little repose; so saying, I went
to bed, and desired to be awakened if Strap should happen to come while
I should be asleep. I was accordingly roused by my friend himself, who
entered my chamber about three o’clock in the afternoon, and presented
a figure to my eyes that I could scarce believe real. In short, this
affectionate shaver, setting out towards Surgeons’ Hall, had inquired
for me there to no purpose: from whence he found his way to the Navy
Office, where he could hear no tidings of me, because I was unknown to
everybody then present; he afterwards went upon ’Change, in hopes of
seeing me upon the Scotch walk, but without success.

At last, being almost in despair of finding me, he resolved to ask
everybody he met in the street, if perchance anyone could give him
information about me! and actually put his resolution in practice, in
spite of the scoffs, curses, and reproaches with which he was answered;
until a blacksmith’s ’prentice seeing him stop a porter with a burden
on his back, and hearing his question, for which he received a hearty
curse, called to him, and asked if the person he inquired after was not
a Scotchman? Strap replied with great eagerness, “Yes, and had on a
brown coat, with long skirts.” “The same!” said the blacksmith. “I saw
him pass by an hour ago,” “Did you so?” cried Strap, rubbing his hands,
“Odd! I am very glad of that—which way went he?” “Towards Tyburn in a
cart,” said he, “if you make good speed, you may get thither time
enough to see him hanged.” This piece of wit incensed my friend to such
a degree, that he called the blacksmith scoundrel, and protested he
would fight him for half-a-farthing. “No, no!” said the other,
stripping; “I’ll have none of your money—you Scotchmen seldom carry
anything about you; but I’ll fight you for love.” There was a ring
immediately formed by the mob: and Strap, finding he could not get off
honourably without fighting, at the same time burning with resentment
against his adversary, quitted his clothes to the care of the
multitude, and the battle began with great violence on the side of
Strap, who in a few minutes exhausted his breath and spirits on his
patient antagonist, who sustained the assault with great coolness, till
finding the barber quite spent, he returned the blows he had lent him,
with such interest, that Strap, after having received three falls on
the hard stones, gave out, and allowed the blacksmith to be the better
man.

The victory being thus decided, it was proposed to adjourn to a cellar
hard by, and drink friends. But when my friend began to gather up his
clothes, he perceived that some honest person or other had made free
with his shirt, neckcloth, hat, and wig, which were carried off; and
probably his coat and waistcoat would have met with the same fate, had
they been worth stealing. It was in vain for him to make a noise, which
only yielded mirth to the spectators; he was fain to get off in this
manner, which he accomplished with much difficulty and appeared before
me all besmeared with blood and dirt. Notwithstanding this misfortune,
such was his transport at finding me safe and sound, that he had almost
stifled and stunk me to death with his embraces. After he had cleaned
himself, and put on one of my shirts, and a woollen nightcap, I
recounted to him the particulars of my night’s campaign, which filled
him with admiration, and made him repeat with great energy an
observation which was often in his mouth, namely, ‘that surely London
is the devil’s drawing-room.’ As neither of us had dined, he desired me
to get up, and the milkwoman coming round at that instant, he went
downstairs, and brought up a quart, with a penny loaf, on which we made
a comfortable meal. He then shared his money with me, which amounted to
eighteen-pence, and left me with an intention to borrow an old wig and
hat of his friend the schoolmaster.

He was no sooner gone, than I began to consider my situation with great
uneasiness, and revolved all the schemes my imagination could suggest,
in order to choose and pursue some one that would procure me bread; for
it is impossible to express the pangs I felt, when I reflected on the
miserable dependence in which I lived at the expense of a poor barber’s
boy. My pride took the alarm, and having no hopes of succeeding at the
Navy Office, I came to a resolution of enlisting in the foot-guards
next day, be the event what it would. This extravagant design, by
flattering my disposition, gave great satisfaction; and I was charging
the enemy at the head of my own regiment, when Strap’s return
interrupted my reverie. The schoolmaster had made him a present of the
tie-wig which he wore, when I was introduced to him, together with an
old hat, whose brims would have overshadowed a Colossus. Though Strap
had ventured to wear them in the dusk, he did not choose to entertain
the mob by day; therefore went to work immediately, and reduced them
both to a moderate size. While he was employed in this office, he
addressed me thus: “To be sure, Mr. Random, you are born a gentleman,
and have a great deal of learning—and, indeed, look like a gentleman;
for, as to person, you may hold up your head with the best of them. On
the other hand, I am a poor but honest cobbler’s son: my mother was as
industrious a woman as ever broke bread, till such time as she took to
drinking, which you very well know; but everybody has failings—Humanum
est errare. Now myself, I am a poor journeyman barber, tolerably well
made and understand some Latin, and have a smattering of Greek; but
what of that? Perhaps I might also say, that I know a little of the
world; but that is to no purpose,—though you be gentle, and I simple,
it does not follow, but that I who am simple may do a good office to
you who are gentle. Now this is the case: my kinsman, the
schoolmaster—perhaps you did not know how nearly he is related to
me—I’ll satisfy you in that presently; his mother and my grandmother’s
sister’s nephew—no, that’s not it!—my grandfather’s brother’s
daughter—rabbit it! I have forgot the degree. But this I know, he and I
are cousins seven times removed.” My impatience to know the good office
he had done me, got the better of my temper, and I interrupted him at
this place with the exclamation, “If the schoolmaster or you can be of
any advantage to me, why don’t you tell me without all this preamble?”
When I pronounced these words with some vehemence, Strap looked at me
for same time with a grave countenance, and then went on: “I’m very
sorry to see such an alteration in your temper of late; you were always
fiery, but now you are grown as crabbed as old Periwinkle the drunken
tinker, on whom you and I (God forgive us!) played so many unlucky
tricks while we were at school—but I will no longer detain you in
suspense, because (doubtless) nothing is more uneasy than doubt—Dubio
procul dubio nil dubius. My friend or relation, or which you will, or
both, the schoolmaster, being informed of the regard I have for you;
for you may be sure I did not fail to let him know of your good
qualities—by the bye, he has undertaken to teach you the pronunciation
of the English tongue, without which, he says, you will be unfit for
business in this country—I say my relation has spoke in your behalf to
a French apothecary who wants a journeyman; and on his recommendation
you may have fifteen pounds a year, bed and board, whenever you
please.” I was too much interested in this piece of news to entertain
it with indifference; but, jumping up, insisted on Strap’s immediately
accompanying me to the house of his friend, that I might not lose this
opportunity through the least delay or neglect on my part.

We were informed, that the schoolmaster was in company at a publichouse
in the neighbourhood, whither we repaired, and found him drinking with
the very individual apothecary in question. When he was called to the
door at our desire, and observed my impatience, he broke out into his
usual term of admiration. “Oh! I suppose, when you heard of this offer,
you did not take leisure enough to come downstairs, but leaped out of
the window: did you overturn no porter nor oyster-woman in your way? It
was a mercy of God you did not knock your brains out against some post
in your career. Oh, my conscience! I believe, had I been in the inmost
recesses of my habitation—the very penetralia—your eagerness would have
surmounted bolts, bars, decency, and everything. The den of Cacus, or
sanctum sanctorum, could not have hid me from you. But come along the
gentleman of whom I spoke is in the house; I will present you to him
forthwith.” When I entered the room, I perceived four or five people
smoking, one of whom the schoolmaster accosted thus: “Mr. Lavement,
here’s the young man of whom I spoke to you.” The apothecary, who was a
little old withered man, with a forehead about an inch high, a nose
turned up at the end, large cheek-bones that helped to form a pit for
his little gray eyes, a great bag of loose skin hanging down on each
side in wrinkles, like the alforjos of a baboon, and a mouth so much
accustomed to that contraction which produces grinning, that he could
not pronounce a syllable without discovering the remains of his teeth,
which consisted of four yellow fangs, not improperly, by anatomists,
called canine. This person, I say, after having eyed me some time,
said, “Oho, ’tis ver well, Monsieur Concordance; young man, you are ver
welcome, take one coup of bierre—and come to mine house to-morrow
morning; Monsieur Concordance vil show you de way.” Upon this I made my
bow, and as I went out of the room could hear him say, “Ma foi! c’est
un beau garçon; c’est un gaillard.”

As I had by my own application, while I served Crab, acquired the
French tongue well enough to read authors written in that language and
understand anything that occurred in conversation, I determined to
pretend ignorance to my new master, that he and his family, whom I
supposed to be of the same country, not being on the reserve before me,
I might possibly discover something in discourse, which would either
yield me amusement or advantage. Next morning Mr. Concordance carried
me to the apothecary’s house, where the bargain was made, and orders
given to provide an apartment for me immediately. But before I entered
upon business the schoolmaster recommended me to his tailor, who gave
me credit for a suit of clothes, to be paid out of the first moiety of
my wages, and they were begun upon that very day; he afterwards
accommodated me with a new hat on the same term: so that in a few days
I hoped to make a very fashionable appearance. In the meantime, Strap
conveyed my baggage to the place allotted for me, which was a back room
up two pair of stairs, furnished with a pallet for me to lie upon, a
chair without a back, a bottle by way of candlestick, and a triangular
piece of glass instead of a mirror; the rest of its ornaments having
been lately removed to one of the garrets, for the convenience of the
servant of an Irish captain, who lodged in the first floor.




CHAPTER XIX


The character of Mr. Lavement, his wife and daughter—some anecdotes of
the family—the mother and daughter rivals—I am guilty of a mistake that
gives me present satisfaction, but is attended with troublesome
consequences


Next day, while I was at work in the shop, a bouncing damsel well
dressed came on pretence of finding a vial for some use or other; and
taking an opportunity, when she thought I did not mind her, of
observing me narrowly, went away with a silent look of disdain. I
easily guessed her sentiments, and my pride took the resolution of
entertaining the same indifference and neglect towards her. At dinner
the maids, with whom I dined in the kitchen, gave me to understand that
this was my master’s only daughter, who would have a very handsome
fortune, on account of which, and her beauty, a great many young
gentlemen made their addresses to her—that she had been twice on the
brink of marriage, but disappointed by the stinginess of her father,
who refused to part with a shilling to promote the match; for which
reason the young lady did not behave to her father with all the filial
veneration that might be expected. In particular she harboured the most
perfect hatred for his countrymen; in which disposition she resembled
her mother, who was an English-woman; and, by the hints they dropped, I
learned the gray mare was the better horse—that she was a matron of a
high spirit, which was often manifested at the expense of her
dependents; that she loved diversions, and looked upon miss as her
rival in all parties—which was indeed the true cause of her
disappointments; for had the mother been hearty in her interest, the
father would not have ventured to refuse her demands. Over and above
this intelligence, I, of myself, soon made more discoveries. Mr.
Lavement’s significant grins at his wife, while she looked another way,
convinced me that he was not at all content with his lot; and his
behaviour in presence of the captain made me believe his chief torment
was jealousy. As for my own part, I was considered in no other light
than that of a menial servant, and had been already six days in the
house without being honoured with one word from either mother or
daughter; the latter (as I understood from the maids) having at table
one day expressed some surprise that her papa should entertain such an
awkward mean-looking journeyman. I was nettled at this piece of
information, and next Sunday (it being my turn to take my diversion)
dressed myself in my new clothes to the greatest advantage, and, vanity
apart, made no contemptible figure.

After having spent most part of the day in company with Strap and some
of his acquaintance, I came home in the afternoon, and was let in by
miss, who not knowing me, dropped a low curtsey as I advanced, which I
returned with a profound bow, and shut the door. By the time I had
turned about, she had perceived her mistake, and changed colour, but
did not withdraw. The passage being narrow, I could not get away
without jolting her; so I was forced to remain where I was with my eyes
fixed to the ground, and my face glowing with blushes. At length, her
vanity coming to her assistance, she went away tittering, and I could
hear her pronounce the word ‘creature!’ From this day forward, she came
into the shop fifty times, every day upon various pretences, and put in
practice so many ridiculous airs, that I could easily perceive her
opinion of me was changed, and that she did not think me altogether an
unworthy conquest. But my heart was so steeled against her charms by
pride and resentment, which were two chief ingredients in my
disposition, that I remained insensible to all her arts; and
notwithstanding some advances she made, could not be prevailed upon to
yield her the least attention. This neglect soon banished all the
favourable impressions she felt for me, and the rage of a slighted
woman took place in her heart; this she manifested not only in all the
suggestions her malice could invent to my prejudice with her father,
but also in procuring for me such servile employments as she hoped
would sufficiently humble my spirit. One day in particular, she ordered
me to brush my master’s coat; but I refusing, a smart dialogue ensued,
which ended in her bursting into tears of rage; when her mother
interposing, and examining into the merits of the cause, determined it
in my favour: and this good office I owed not to any esteem or
consideration she had for me, but solely to the desire of mortifying
her daughter, who on this occasion observed, that let people be never
so much in the right, there were some folks who would never do them
justice, but, to be sure, they had their reasons for it, which some
people were ignorant of, although they despised their little arts. This
insinuation of some people and some folks put me upon observing the
behaviour of my mistress more narrowly for the future: and it was not
long before I had reason to believe that she looked upon her daughter
as a rival in the affections of Captain O’Donnell, who lodged in the
house.

In the meantime, my industry and knowledge gained me the goodwill of my
master, who would often say in French, “Mardy! c’est un bon garçon.” He
had a great deal of business; but he was mostly employed among his
fellow refugees, his profits were small. However, his expense for
medicines was not great; for he was the most expert man at a
succedaneum of any apothecary in London, so that I have been sometimes
amazed to see him, without the least hesitation, make up a physician’s
prescription, though he had not in his shop one medicine mentioned in
it. Oyster-shells he could convert into crab’s eyes; common oil into
oil of sweet almonds; syrup of sugar into balsamic syrup; Thames water
into aqua cinnamoni; and a hundred more costly preparations were
produced in an instant, from the cheapest and coarsest drugs of the
materia medica: and when any common thing was ordered for a patient, he
always took care to disguise it in colour or taste, or both, in such a
manner that it could not possibly be known; for which purpose cochineal
and oil of cloves were of great service. Mr. Lavement had attempted
more than once to introduce a vegetable diet into his family, by
launching out into the praise of roots and greens, and decrying the use
of flesh, both as a physician and philosopher; but all his rhetoric
could not make one proselyte to his opinion, and even the wife of his
bosom declared against the proposal.

One afternoon, when her husband was abroad, and his daughter gone to
visit, this lady ordered me to call a hackney-coach, in which she and
the captain drove towards Covent Garden. Miss came home in the evening,
and, supping at her usual hour, went to bed. About eleven o’clock my
master entered, and asked if his wife was gone to sleep: upon which I
told him, my mistress went out in the afternoon, and was not yet
returned. This was like a clap of thunder to the poor apothecary, who
starting back, cried, “Mort de ma vie! vat you tell a me? My vife not
at home!” At that instant a patient’s servant arrived with a
prescription for a draught, which my master taking, went into the shop
to make it up with his own hand. While he rubbed the ingredients in a
glass mortar, he inquired of me, whether or no his wife went out alone;
and no sooner heard that she was in company with the captain, than with
one blow he split the mortar into a thousand pieces, and grinning like
the head of a bass viol, exclaimed, “Ah, traitresse!” It would have
been impossible for me to have preserved my gravity a minute longer,
when I was happily relieved by a rap at the door, which I opened, and
perceived my mistress coming out of the coach. She flounced immediately
into the shop, and addressed her husband thus: “I suppose you thought I
was lost, my dear. Captain O’Donnell has been so good as to treat me
with a play.” The reply, it may be supposed, was anything but courteous
but the captain, who had been all the time at the door discharging the
coach, entered, and Mr. Lavement, changing his tone, saluted him with
all the usual politesse of a Frenchman.

Shortly after this event, by the knowledge which I acquired of the
family secrets, my life became much more agreeable; and as I every day
improved in my knowledge of the town I shook off my awkward air by
degrees, and acquired the character of a polite journeyman apothecary.




CHAPTER XX


I am assaulted and dangerously wounded—suspect O’Donnell, and am
confirmed in my opinion—concert a scheme of revenge, and put it into
execution—O’Donnell robs his own servant and disappears—make my
addresses to a lady, and am miraculously delivered from her snare


One night, at about twelve o’clock, as I returned from visiting a
patient at Chelsea, I received a blow on my head from an unseen hand,
that stretched me senseless on the ground; and was left for dead with
three stabs of a sword in my body. The groans I uttered when I
recovered the use of my reason alarmed the people of a solitary
alehouse that stood near the spot where I lay: and they were humane
enough to take me in, and send for a surgeon, who dressed my wounds,
and assured me they were not mortal. One of them penetrated through the
skin and muscles of one side of my belly in such a manner, that
doubtless the assassin imagined he had run me through the entrails. The
second slanted along one of my ribs; and the last, which was intended
for the finishing stroke, having been directed to my heart, the sword
snapped upon my breast-bone, and the point remained sticking in the
skin. When I reflected upon this event, I could not persuade myself
that I had been assaulted by a common footpad, because it is not usual
for such people to murder though they rob, especially when they meet
with no resistance; and I found my money, and everything else about me
but my carcase, safe. I concluded, therefore, that I must either have
been mistaken for another, or obliged to the private resentment of some
secret enemy for what had happened; and as I could remember nobody who
had the least cause of complaint against me, except Captain O’Donnell
and my master’s daughter, my suspicion settled upon them, though I took
care to conceal it, that I might the sooner arrive at confirmation.

With this view, I went home in the chair about ten o’clock in the
morning; and as the chairman supported me into the house, met the
captain in the passage, who no sooner saw me than he started back and
gave evident signs of guilty confusion, which he would have accounted
for from surprise occasioned by the seeing me in such a condition. My
master having heard my story, condoled me with a good deal of sympathy,
and when he understood my wounds were not dangerous, ordered me to be
carried upstairs to bed; though not without some opposition from his
wife, who was of opinion that it would be better for me to go to an
hospital, where I should be more carefully attended. My meditation was
employed in concerting with myself some method of revenge against
Squire O’Donnell and his inamorata, whom I looked upon as the author of
my misfortune; when miss, who was not at home at my arrival, entered my
chamber, and saying she was sorry for the accident that had befallen
me, asked if I suspected anybody to be the assassin; upon which I fixed
my eyes steadfastly upon her and answered, “Yes.” She discovered no
symptom of confusion, but replied hastily, “If that be the case, why
don’t you take out a warrant, to have him apprehended? It will cost but
a trifle—if you have no money, I’ll lend you.” This frankness not only
cured me of my suspicion with respect to her, but even staggered my
belief with regard to the captain, of whose guilt I resolved to have
further proof before I should enterprise anything in the way of
revenge. I thanked her kindly for her generous offer, which, however, I
had no occasion to accept, being determined to do nothing rashly: for
though I could plainly perceive the person who attacked me to be a
soldier, whose face I thought was familiar to me, I could not swear
with a safe conscience to any particular man; and, granting I could, my
prosecution of him would not much avail.

This uncertainty I pretended, lest the captain, hearing from her that I
knew the person who wounded me, might think proper to withdraw before I
could be in a condition to requite him. In two days I was up and able
to do a little business, so that Mr. Lavement made shift to carry on
his practice without hiring another journeyman in my room.

The first thing I attempted towards a certain discovery of my secret
enemy, was to get into O’Donnell’s apartment, while he was abroad in an
undress, and examine his sword, the point of which being broken off, I
applied the fragment that was found sticking in my body, and found it
answered the fractured part exactly. There was no room left for doubt;
and all that remained was to fix upon a scheme of revenge, which almost
solely engrossed my thoughts during the space of eight nights and days.
Sometimes I was tempted to fall upon him in the same manner as he had
practised upon me, and kill him outright. But this assault my honour
opposed as a piece of barbarous cowardice, in which he was not to be
imitated. At other times I entertained thoughts of demanding
satisfaction in an honourable way; but was diverted from this
undertaking by considering the uncertainty of the event, and the nature
of the injury he had done me, which did not entitle him to such easy
terms. At last I determined to pursue a middle course, and actually put
my design in execution after this manner. Having secured the assistance
of Strap and two of his acquaintance whom he could depend upon, we
provided ourselves with disguises, and I caused the following letter to
be delivered to him by one of our associates in livery, one Sunday
evening:—

“Sir—If I may be allowed to judge from appearance, it will not be
disagreeable for you to hear that my husband is gone to Bagshot to
visit a patient, and will not return till to-morrow night; so that, if
you have anything to propose to me (as your behaviour on many occasions
has seemed to insinuate), you will do well to embrace the present
opportunity of seeing,


Yours, etc.”


This letter was signed with the name of an apothecary’s wife who lived
in Chelsea, of whom I had heard O’Donnell was an admirer. Everything
succeeded to our wish. The hero hastened towards the place of
appointment, and was encountered by us in the very place where he had
assaulted me. We rushed upon him all at once, secured his sword,
stripped off his clothes even to the skin, which was scourged with
nettles till he was blistered from head to foot, notwithstanding all
the eloquence of his tears and supplications. When I was satisfied with
the stripes I had bestowed, we carried off his clothes, which we hid in
a hedge near the place, and left him stark naked to find his way home
in the best manner he could, while I took care to be there before him.
I afterwards understood that, in his way to the lodgings of a friend,
who lived in the skirts of the town, he was picked up by the watch, who
carried him to the round-house, from whence he sent for clothes to his
lodgings, and next morning arrived at the door in a chair, wrapt up in
a blanket he had borrowed; for his body was so sore and swelled, that
he could not bear to be confined in his wearing apparel. He was treated
with the utmost tenderness by my mistress and her daughter, who vied
with each other in their care and attendance of him; but Lavement
himself could not forbear expressing his joy, by several malicious
grins, while he ordered me to prepare an unguent for his sores. As to
myself, nobody can doubt my gratification, when I had every day an
opportunity of seeing my revenge protracted on the body of my
adversary, by the ulcers of which I had been the cause; and, indeed, I
not only enjoyed the satisfaction of having flea’d him alive, but
another also which I had not foreseen. The story of his being attacked
and stripped in such a place having been inserted in the news, gave
information to those who found his clothes next day, whither to bring
them; and accordingly he retrieved everything he had lost except a few
letters, among which was that which I had writ to him in the name of
the apothecary’s wife. This, and the others, which were all on the
subject of love (for this Hibernian hero was one of those people who
are called fortune-hunters), fell into the hands of a certain female
author, famous for the scandal she has published; who, after having
embellished them with some ornaments of her own invention, gave them to
the to town in print. I was very much shocked on reflection, that I
might possibly be the occasion of a whole family’s unhappiness on
account of the letter I had written; but was eased of that
apprehension, when I understood that the Chelsea apothecary had
commenced a lawsuit against the printer for defamation, and looked upon
the whole as a piece of forgery committed by the author, who had
disappeared. But whatever might be his opinion of the matter, our two
ladies seemed to entertain a different idea of it: for as soon as the
pamphlet appeared, I could perceive their care of their patient
considerably diminish, till at last it ended in a total neglect. It was
impossible for him to be ignorant of this change, any more than of the
occasion of it; but as he was conscious to himself of having deserved
worse than contempt at their hands, he was glad to come off so cheaply,
and contented himself with muttering curses and threats against the
apothecary, who, as he imagined, having got an inkling of the
appointment with his wife, had taken revenge of him in the manner
described. By the time he had got a new scarf skin his character was
become so notorious, that he thought it high time for him to decamp;
and his retreat he performed in one night, without beat of drum, after
having robbed his own servant of everything that belonged to him except
the clothes he had on his back.

A few days after he disappeared, Mr. Lavement, for his own security,
took into his custody a large old trunk which he had left; and as it
was very heavy, made no question that the contents were sufficient to
indemnify him for what O’Donnell owed in lodging. But a month being
elapsed without hearing any tidings of this adventurer, and my master
being impatient to know what the trunk contained, he ordered me to
break it open in his presence, which task I performed with the pestle
of our great mortar, and discovered, to his inexpressible astonishment
and mortification, a heap of stones.

About this time, my friend Strap informed me of an offer he had to go
abroad with a gentleman in quality of valet de chambre and at the same
time assured me that, whatever advantage he might propose to himself
from this prospect, he could not bear the thoughts of parting from me,
so much was he attached to my fortune. In spite of all the obligations
I owed to this poor, honest fellow, ingratitude is so natural to the
heart of man, that I began to be tired of his acquaintance: and now
that I had contracted other friendships which appeared more creditable,
was even ashamed to see a journeyman barber inquiring after me with the
familiarity of a companion. I therefore, on pretence of consulting his
welfare, insisted upon his accepting the proposal, which he at last
determined to embrace, with great reluctance, and in a few days, took
his leave of me, shedding a flood of tears, which I could not behold
without emotion. I now began to look upon me as of a gentleman in
reality; learned to dance, frequented plays during the holidays; became
the oracle of an ale-house, where every dispute was referred to my
decision; and at length contracted an acquaintance with a young lady,
who found means to make a conquest of my heart, and upon whom I
prevailed, after much attendance and solicitation, to give me a promise
of marriage. As this beautiful creature passed for a rich heiress, I
blessed my good fortune, and was actually on the point of crowning all
my wishes by matrimony, when I made such a discovery as effectually
turned me from my design, and I abandoned all thoughts of marriage for
the future.




CHAPTER XXI


Squire Gawky comes to lodge with my master—is involved in a troublesome
affair, out of which he is extricated by me—he marries my master’s
daughter—they conspire against me—I am found guilty of theft,
discharged—deserted by my friends, I hire a room in St. Gile’s—where,
by accident, I find the lady to whom I paid my addresses in a miserable
condition—I relieve her


When I enjoyed myself at large in this temper of mind, Lavement let his
first floor to my countryman and acquaintance, Squire Gawky, who by
this time had got a lieutenancy in the army, and such a martial
ferocity in his appearance that I was afraid he would remember what
happened between us in Scotland, and atone for his breach of
appointment then by his punctuality now; but whether he had actually
forgot me, or was willing to make me believe so, he betrayed not the
least symptom of recognition at sight of me, and I remained quite cured
of my apprehension; though I had occasion not long after to be
convinced, that howsoever his externals might be altered, he was at
bottom the same individual Gawky, whom I have already described. For
coming home late one night from the house of a patient, I heard a noise
in the street, and as I approached, perceived two gentlemen in custody,
of three watchmen. The prisoners, who were miserable, disfigured with
dirt, complained bitterly of the loss of their hats and wigs; and one
of them, whom by his tongue I know to be a Scotchman, lamented most
piteously, offering a guinea for his liberty, which the watchman
refused, alleging that one of his companions was wounded grievously,
and that he must stand to the consequence. My prejudice in favour of my
native country was so strong, that I could not bear to see anybody
belonging to it in distress, and therefore, with one blow of my
faithful cudgel, knocked down the watchman who had hold of the person
for whom I was chiefly concerned. He was no sooner disengaged, than he
betook himself to his heels, and left me to maintain the dispute as I
should think proper; and, indeed, I came off but scurvily, for, before
I could avail myself of my speed, I received a blow on the eye, from
one of the other two, that had well nigh deprived me of the use of that
organ. However, I made shift to get home, where I was informed of
Captain Gawky’s being robbed and abused by a company of footpads, and
was ordered by my master to prepare an emollient glyster and paregoric
draught, in order to allay and compose the ferment of his spirits,
occasioned by the barbarous treatment he had undergone, while he took
twelve ounces of blood from him immediately.

When I inquired into the particulars of this adventure, and understood
by the servant that he came in just before me, without hat and wig, I
made no scruple of believing him to be the person I had released, and
was confirmed in my belief upon hearing his voice, to which (before
that event) I had long been a stranger.

My eye being considerably swelled and inflamed, I could not reflect
upon my enterprise without cursing my own folly, and even resolving to
declare the truth of the whole story in order to be revenged on the
cowardly wretch for whom I had suffered: accordingly, next day after he
had told, in presence of my master, his wife and daughter, who came to
him, a thousand lies concerning the prowess he had shown in making his
escape, I ventured to explain the mystery, and, calling in the evidence
of my contused eye, upbraided him with cowardice and ingratitude. Gawky
was so astonished at this that he could not answer one word, and the
rest of the company stared at one another; till at length my mistress
reprimanded me for my insolent behaviour, and threatened to turn me
away for my presumption. Upon which, Gawky (having recollected himself)
observed, as the young man might have mistaken another person for him,
he could forgive his insinuations, more especially as he seemed to have
suffered for his incivility; but advised me to be more certain in my
conjectures for the future, before I ventured to publish them to the
prejudice of any man. Miss applauded the Captain’s generosity in
pardoning one who had so villainously aspersed him, and I began to
imagine her praise was not at all disinterested. But the apothecary,
who perhaps had more penetration or less partiality than his wife and
daughter, differed from them in their sentiments of the matter, and
expressed himself to me in the shop in this manner: “Ah mon pauvre
Roderique! you have more of de veracite dan of de prudence—bot mine
vife and dater be diablement sage, and Monsieur le Capitaine un
fanfaron, pardieu!”

This eulogium on his wife and daughter, though spoken ironically by
him, was nevertheless literally just; by espousing the cause of Gawky,
the one obliged a valuable lodger, and the other acquired a husband at
a juncture when one was absolutely necessary. The young lady insinuated
herself so artfully into the affection of this new lodger, that in less
than a fortnight, on pretence of going to the play, they drove away
together to the Fleet, where they were married; and in the morning came
home, where they asked her father’s and mother’s blessing. The prudent
parents, notwithstanding the precipitation with which the match was
carried on, did not think fit to refuse their approbation; for the
apothecary was not ill pleased to find his daughter married to a young
man of a good prospect, who had not mentioned one syllable on the
article of her dowry; and his wife was rejoiced at being rid of a rival
and a spy upon her. Whatever face Gawky put on the matter, my discovery
of the adventure before related, and the reproaches I vented against
him, had stung him to the soul, and cherished the seeds of enmity so
strongly in his breast, that he imparted his indignation to his wife,
who being as desirous as himself to accomplish the ruin of one that not
only slighted her caresses, but was able on any occasion to discover
particulars not at all advantageous to her character, readily joined in
a conspiracy against me, which (had it taken effect as they expected)
would infallibly have brought me to an ignominious death.

My master having several times missed large quantities of medicines, of
which I could give no account, at last lost all patience, and in plain
terms taxed me with having embezzled them for my own use. As I could
only oppose my single asseveration to his suspicion, he told me one
day, “Your vord not be give me de satisfaction—me find necessaire to
chercher for my medicine; pardonnez moi—il faut chercher—me demand le
clef of your coffre a cette heure.” Then raising his voice to conceal
the fright he was in lest I should make any opposition, he went on,
“Oui! I charge you rendez le clef of your coffre—moi—si, moi qui vous
parle.” I was fired with so much resentment and disdain at this
accusation, that I burst into tears, which he took for a sign of guilt;
and pulling out my key, told him he might satisfy himself immediately,
though he would not find it so easy to satisfy me for the injury my
reputation had suffered from his unjust suspicion. He took the key and
mounted up to my chamber, attended by the whole family, saying, “Eh
bien, nous verrons—nous verrons.” But what was my horror and amazement,
when, opening my chest, he pulled out a handful of the very things that
were missing, and pronounced, “Ah, ha, vous etes bienvenu—mardy, Mons.
Roderique, you be fort innocent!” I had not power to utter one word in
my own vindication, but stood motionless and silent, while everybody
present made their respective remarks on what appeared against me. The
servants said they were sorry for my misfortune, and went away
repeating, “Who would have thought it?” My mistress took occasion from
this detection to rail against the practice of employing strangers in
general; and Mrs. Gawky, after having observed that she never had a
good opinion of my fidelity, proposed to have me carried before the
justice and committed to Newgate immediately. Her husband was actually
upon the stairs in his way for a constable, when Mr. Lavement knowing
the cost and trouble of a prosecution to which he must bind himself,
and at the same time dreading lest some particulars of my confession
might affect his practice, called out. “Restez, mon fils! restez, it be
veritablement one grand crime which dis pauvre diable have
committed—bot peut-etre de good God give him de penitence, and me vill
not have upon mine head de blood of one sinner.” The captain and his
lady used all the Christian arguments their zeal could suggest to
prevail upon the apothecary to pursue me to destruction, and
represented the injustice he did to the community of which he was a
member, in letting a villain escape, who would not fail of doing more
mischief in the world when he should reflect on his coming off so
easily now; but their eloquence made no impression on my master, who
turning to me said, “Go, miserable, go from mine house quick,
quick!—and make reparation for your mauvaise actions.” By this time my
indignation had roused me from the stupefaction in which I had hitherto
remained and I began in this manner:—“Sir, appearances I own condemn
me; but you are imposed upon as much as I am abused: I have fallen a
sacrifice to the rancour of that scoundrel” (pointing to Gawky) “who
has found means to convey your goods hither, that the detection of them
might blast my reputation, and accomplish my destruction. His hatred to
me is owing to a consciousness of his having wronged me in my own
country—for which injury he in a cowardly manner, refused me the
satisfaction of a gentleman; he knows, moreover, that I am no stranger
to his dastardly behaviour in this town, which I have recounted before,
and he is unwilling that such a testimony of his ingratitude and
pusillanimity should live upon the earth; for this reason he is guilty
of the most infernal malice to bring about my ruin. And I am afraid,
madam (turning to Mrs. Gawky) you have too easily entered into the
sentiments of your husband. I have often found you my enemy, and am
well acquainted with the occasion of your being so, which I don’t at
present think proper to declare; but I would advise you, for your own
sake, not to drive me to extremity.” This address enraged her so much
that with a face as red us scarlet and the eyes of a fury, she strutted
up to me and putting her hands in her side, spat in my face, saying, I
was a scandalous villain, but she defied my malice; and that unless her
papa would not prosecute me like a thief as I was, she would not stay
another night under his roof. At the same time, Gawky assuming a big
look, told me, he scorned what lies I could invent against him; but
that, if I pretended to asperse his wife, he would put me to death. To
this threat I answered, “I wish I could meet with thee in a desert,
that I might have an opportunity of punishing thee for thy perfidy
towards me, and rid the world of such a rascal. What hinders me this
moment,” said I, seizing an old bottle that stood by, “from doing
myself that justice?” I had no sooner armed myself in this manner, than
Gawky and his father-in-law retired in such a hurry, that the one
overturned the other, and they rolled together down stairs, while my
mistress swooned away with fear, and her daughter asked if I intended
to murder her. I gave her to understand, that nothing was farther from
my intention, that I would leave her to the stings of her own
conscience; but was firmly resolved to slit her husband’s nose,
whenever fortune should offer a convenient opportunity. Then going down
stairs, I met Lavement coming up trembling with the pestle in his hand,
and Gawky behind armed with his sword, pushing him forward. I demanded
a parley: and having assured him of my pacific disposition, Gawky
exclaimed, “Ah, villain! you have killed my dear wife.” And the
apothecary cried, “Ah, coquin! vere is my shild?” “The lady,” said I,
“is above stairs, unhurt by me, and will, a few months hence, I believe
reward your concern.” Here she called to them, and desired they would
let the wretch go, and trouble themselves no further about him. To
which request her father consented, observing, nevertheless, that my
conversation was ‘very mysterious.’

Finding it impossible to vindicate my innocence, I left the house
immediately, and went to the schoolmaster, with an intention of
clearing myself to him, and asking his advice with regard to my future
conduct; but, to my inexpressible vexation, he was gone to the country,
where he would stay two or three days. I returned with a design of
consulting some acquaintance I had acquired in the neighbourhood; but
my story had taken air through the officiousness of the servants, and
not one of my friends would vouchsafe me a hearing. Thus I found
myself, by the iniquity of mankind, in a much more deplorable condition
than ever: for though I had been formerly as poor, my reputation was
without blemish, and my health unimpaired till now; but at present my
good name was lost, my money gone, my friends were alienated, my body
was infected by an odious distemper; and my faithful Strap, who alone
could yield me pity and assistance, absent I knew not where.

The first resolution I could take in this melancholy conjuncture, was
to remove my clothes to the house of the person with whom I had
formerly lodged, where I remained two days in hopes of getting another
place by the interest of Mr. Concordance, to whom I made no doubt of
being able to vindicate my character; but in this supposition I
reckoned without my best, for Lavement took care to be beforehand with
me; and when I attempted to explain the whole affair to the
schoolmaster, I found him so prepossessed against me, that he would
scarce hear me to an end; but when I had finished my justification,
shook his head, and beginning with his usual exclamation said, “That
won’t go down with me. I am very sorry I should have the misfortune of
being concerned in the affair, but, however, shall be more cautious for
the future. I will trust no man from henceforward—no, not my father who
begat me, nor the brother who lay with me in my mother’s womb: should
Daniel rise from the dead, I would think him an impostor; and were the
genius of truth to appear, would question its veracity!” I told him,
that one day it was possible he might be convinced of the injury I had
suffered, and repent of his premature determination. To which remark he
answered, the proof of my innocence would make his bowels vibrate with
joy; “but till that shall happen,” continued he, “I must beg to have no
manner of connection with you—my reputation is at stake. I shall be
looked upon as your accomplice and abettor—people will say Jonathan
Wild was but a type of me—boys will hoot at me as I pass along; and the
cinder-wenches belch forth reproaches wafted in a gale impregnated with
gin: I shall be notorious—the very butt of slander, and sink of
infamy!” I was not in a humour to relish the climax of expressions upon
which this gentleman valued himself in all his discourses; but, without
any ceremony, took my leave, cursed with every sentiment of horror
which my situation could suggest. I considered, however, in the
intervals of my despondence, that I must, in some shape suit my expense
to my calamitous circumstances, and with that view hired an apartment
in a garret near St. Giles’s, at the rate of nine-pence per week.

I one day, when I sat in this solitary retreat musing upon the
unhappiness of my fate, was alarmed by a groan that issued from a
chamber contiguous to mine, into which I immediately ran, and found a
woman stretched on a miserable truckle bed, without any visible signs
of life. Having applied a smelling bottle to her nose, the blood began
to revisit her cheeks, and she opened her eyes; but, good heaven! what
were the emotions of my soul, when I discovered her to be the same
individual lady who had triumphed over my heart, and to whose fate I
had almost been inseparably joined! Her deplorable situation filled my
breast with compassion. She knew me immediately; and, straining me
gently in her arms, shed a torrent of tears, which I could not help
increasing. At length, casting a languishing look at me, she pronounced
with a feeble voice, “Dear Mr. Random, I do not deserve this concern at
your hands: I am a vile creature, who had a base design upon your
person—suffer me, to expiate that, and all my other crimes, by a
miserable death, which will not fail to overtake me in a few hours.” I
encouraged her as much as I could, told her I forgave all her
intentions with regard to me; and that, although my circumstances were
extremely low, I would share my last farthing with her. I begged in the
meantime to know the immediate cause of that fit from which she had
just recovered, and said, I would endeavour by my skill to prevent any
more such attacks. She seemed very much affected with this expression,
took my hand, and pressed it to her lips, saying, “You are too
generous! I wish I could live to express my gratitude—but alas! I
perish for want.” Then shutting her eyes, she relapsed into another
swoon. Such extremity of distress must have waked the most obdurate
heart to sympathy and compassion; what effect then must it have had on
mine, that was naturally prone to every tender passion? I ran
downstairs, and sent my landlady to a chemist’s shop for some cinnamon
water, while I, returning to this unfortunate creature’s chamber, used
all the means in my power to bring her to herself; this aim with much
difficulty I accomplished, and made her drink a glass of the cordial to
recruit her spirits: then I prepared a little mulled red wine and a
toast, which having taken, she found herself thoroughly revived, and
informed me, that she had not tasted food for eight and forty hours
before. As I was impatient to know the occasion and nature of her
calamity, she gave me to understand, that she was a woman of the town
by profession; that in the course of her adventures she found herself
dangerously infected with a distemper, to which all of her class are
particularly subject; that her malady gaining ground every day, she
became loathsome to herself and offensive to others: when she resolved
to retire to some obscure corner where she might be cured with as
little noise and expense as possible; that she had accordingly chosen
this place of retreat, and put herself into the hands of an advertising
doctor, who having fleeced her of all the money she had, or could
procure, left her three days ago in a worse condition than that in
which he found her; that except the clothes on her back, she had pawned
or sold everything that belonged to her to satisfy that rapacious
quack, and quiet the clamour of her landlady, who still persisted in
her threats to turn her out into the street. After having moralised
upon these particulars, I proposed that she should lodge in the same
room with me, an expedient that would save some money: and assured her,
I would undertake to cure her as well as my own, during which she
should partake of all the conveniences that I could afford to myself.
She embraced my offer with unfeigned acknowledgment, and I began to put
it in practice immediately. I found her not only an agreeable
companion, whose conversation greatly alleviated my chagrin, but also a
careful nurse, who served me with the utmost fidelity and affection.
One day, while I testified my surprise that a woman of her beauty, good
sense, and education (for she had a large portion of each), could be
reduced to such an infamous and miserable way of life, she answered
with a sigh, “These very advantages were the cause of my undoing.” This
remarkable reply inflamed my curiosity to such a degree, that I begged
she would favour me with the particulars of her story, and she complied
in these words.




CHAPTER XXII


The History of Miss Williams


‘My father was an eminent merchant in the city who having, in the
course of trade, suffered very considerable losses, retired in his old
age with his wife to a small estate in the country, which he had
purchased with the remains of his fortune. At that time, I being but
eight years of age, was left in town for the convenience of education,
boarded with an aunt, who was a rigid presbyterian, and confined me so
closely to what she called the duties of religion, that in time I grew
weary of her doctrines, and by degrees received an aversion for the
good books, she daily recommended to my perusal. As I increased in age,
and appeared with a person not disagreeable, I contracted a good deal
of acquaintance among my own sex; one of whom, after having lamented
the restraint I was under from the narrowness of my aunt’s sentiments,
told me I must now throw off the prejudices of opinion imbibed under
her influence and example, and learn to think for myself; for which
purpose she advised me to read Shaftsbury, Tindal, Hobbes, and all the
authors that are remarkable for their deviation from the old way of
thinking, and by comparing one with the other, I should soon be able to
form a system of my own. I followed her advice; and whether it was
owing to my prepossession against what I had formerly read, or the
clearness of argument in these my new instructors, I know not; but I
studied them with pleasure, and in a short time became a professed
freethinker. Proud of my improvement, I argued in all companies, and
that with such success, that I soon acquired the reputation of a
philosopher, and few people durst undertake me in a dispute. I grew
vain upon my good fortune, and at length pretended to make my aunt a
proselyte to my opinion; but she no sooner perceived my drift than,
taking the alarm, she wrote to my father an account of my heresy, and
conjured him, as he tendered the good of my soul, to remove me
immediately from the dangerous place where I had contracted such sinful
principles. Accordingly, my father ordered me into the country, where I
arrived in the fifteenth year of my age, and, by his command gave him a
detail of all the articles of my faith, which he did not find so
unreasonable as they had been represented. Finding myself suddenly
deprived of the company and pleasures of the town, I grew melancholy
and it was some time before I could relish my situation. But solitude
became every day more and more familiar to me and I consoled myself in
my retreat with the enjoyment of a good library, at such times as were
not employed in the management of the family (for my mother had been
dead three years), in visiting, or some other party of rural diversion.
Having more imagination than judgment, I addicted myself too much to
poetry and romance; and, in short, was looked upon as a very
extraordinary person by everybody in the country where I resided.

‘I had one evening strayed, with a book in my hand, into a wood that
bordered on the high road, at a little distance from my father’s house,
when a certain drunken squire, riding by, perceived me, and crying,
“Holloa, there’s a charming creature!” alighted in a moment, caught me
in his arms, and treated me so rudely that I shrieked as loud as I
could, and in the meantime opposed his violence with all the strength
that rage and resentment could inspire. During this struggle, another
horseman came up, who, seeing a lady so unworthily used, dismounted,
and flew to my assistance. The squire, mad with disappointment, or
provoked with the reproaches of the other gentleman, quitted me, and
running to his horse, drew a pistol from the saddle, and fired it at my
protector, who happily receiving no damage, went up, and, with the
butt-end of his whip laid him prostrate on the ground before he could
use the other, which his antagonist immediately seized, and, clapping
to the squire’s breast, threatened to put him to death for his
cowardice and treachery. In this dilemma I interposed and begged his
life, which was granted to my request, after he had asked pardon, and
swore his intention was only to obtain a kiss. However, my defender
thought proper to unload the other pistol, and throw away the flints,
before he gave him his liberty. This courteous stranger conducted me
home, where my father having learned the signal service he had done me,
loaded him with caresses, and insisted on his lodging that night at our
house. If the obligation he had conferred upon me justly inspired me
with sentiments of gratitude, his appearance and conversation seemed to
entitle him to somewhat more. He was about the age of two-and-twenty,
among the tallest of the middle size; had chestnut-coloured hair, which
he wore tied up in a ribbon; a high polished forehead, a nose inclining
to the aquiline, lively blue eyes, red pouting lips, teeth as white as
snow, and a certain openness of countenance—but why need I describe any
more particulars of his person? I hope you will do me the justice to
believe I do not flatter, when I say he was the exact resemblance of
you; and if I had not been well acquainted with his family and degree,
I should have made no scruple of concluding that you was his brother.
He spoke and seemed to have no reserve: for what he said was ingenuous,
sensible, and uncommon. “In short,” said she, bursting into tears, “he
was formed for the ruin of our sex. His behaviour was modest and
respectful, but his looks were so significant, that I could easily
observe he secretly blessed the occasion that introduced him to my
acquaintance. We learned from his discourse that he was the eldest son
of a wealthy gentleman in the neighbourhood, to whose name we were no
strangers—that he had been to visit an acquaintance in the country,
from whose house he was returning home, when my shrieks brought him to
my rescue.”

‘All night long my imagination formed a thousand ridiculous
expectations: there was so much of knight-errantry in this gentleman’s
coming to the relief of a damsel in distress, with whom he immediately
became enamoured, that all I had read of love and chivalry recurred to
my fancy; and I looked upon myself as a princess in some region of
romance, who being delivered from the power of some brutal giant or
satyr, by a generous Oroondates, was bound in gratitude, as well as led
by inclination, to yield up my affections to him without reserve. In
vain did I endeavour to chastise these foolish conceits by reflections
more reasonable and severe: the amusing images took full possession of
my mind, and my dreams represented my hero sighing at my feet, in the
language of a despairing lover. Next morning after breakfast he took
his leave, when my father begged the favour of further acquaintance
with him; to which request he replied by a compliment to him, and a
look to me so full of eloquence and tenderness, that my whole soul
received the soft impression. In a short time he repeated his visit;
and as a recital of the particular steps he pursued to ruin me would be
tedious and impertinent, let it suffice to say, he made it his business
to insinuate himself into my esteem, by convincing me of his own good
sense, and at the same time flattering my understanding. This task he
performed in the most artful manner, by seeming to contradict me often
through misapprehension, that I might have an opportunity of clearing
myself the more to my own honour. Having thus secured my good opinion,
he began to give me some tokens of a particular passion, founded on a
veneration of the qualities of my mind, and, as an accidental ornament,
admired the beauties of my person; till at being fully persuaded of his
conquest, he chose a proper season for the theme, and disclosed his
love in terms so ardent and sincere, that it was impossible for me to
disguise the sentiments of my heart, and he received my approbation
with the most lively transport. After this mutual declaration, we
contrived to meet more frequently in private interviews, where we
enjoyed the conversation of one another, in all the elevation of fancy
and impatience of hope that reciprocal adoration can inspire. He
professed his honourable intentions, of which I made no question;
lamented the avaricious disposition of his father, who had destined him
for the arms of another, and vowed eternal fidelity with such an
appearance of candour and devotion—that I became a dupe to his deceit.
Cursed be the day on which I gave away my innocence and peace! Cursed
be my beauty that first attracted the attention of the seducer! Cursed
be my education, that, by refining my sentiments, made my heart the
more susceptible! Cursed be my good sense, that fixed me to one object,
and taught me the preference I enjoyed was but my due! Had I been ugly,
nobody would have tempted me; had I been ignorant, the charms of my
person would not have atoned for the coarseness of my conversation; had
I been giddy, my vanity would have divided my inclinations, and my
ideas would have been so diffused, that I should never have listened to
the enchantments of one alone.

‘But to return to my unfortunate story. After some months, the visits
of my lover became less frequent, and his behaviour less warm: I
perceived his coldness, my heart took the alarm, my tears reproached
him, and I insisted upon the performance of his promise to espouse me,
that, whatever should happen, my reputation might be safe. He seemed to
acquiesce in my proposal, and left me on pretence of finding a proper
clergyman to unite us in the bands of wedlock. But alas! the inconstant
had no intention to return. I waited a whole week with the utmost
impatience; sometimes doubting his honour, at other times inventing
excuses for him, and condemning myself for harbouring suspicions of his
faith. At length I understood from a gentleman who dined at our house,
that this perfidious wretch was on the point of setting out for London
with his bride, to buy clothes for their approaching nuptials. This
information distracted me! Rage took possession of my soul; I denounced
a thousand imprecations, and formed as many schemes of revenge against
the traitor who had undone me. Then my resentment would subside to
silent sorrow. I recalled the tranquillity I lost, I wept over my
infatuation, and sometimes a ray of hope would intervene, and for a
moment cheer my drooping heart; I would revolve all the favourable
circumstances of his character, repeat the vows he made, ascribe his
absence to the vigilance of a suspicious father who compelled him to a
match his soul abhorred, and comfort myself with the expectation of
seeing him before the thing should be brought to any terms of
agreement. But how vain was my imagination! That villain left me
without remorse, and in a few days the news of his marriage were spread
all over the country. My horror was then inconceivable; and had not the
desire of revenge diverted the resolution, I should infallibly have put
an end to my miserable life. My father observed the symptoms of my
despair: and though I have good reason to believe he guessed the cause,
was at a great deal of pains to seem ignorant of my affliction, while
he endeavoured with parental fondness to alleviate my distress. I saw
his concern, which increased my anguish, and raised my fury against the
author of my calamity to an implacable degree.

‘Having furnished myself with a little money, I made an elopement from
this unhappy parent in the night-time, and about break of day arrived
at a small town, from whence a stage coach set out for London, in which
I embarked, and next day alighted in town; the spirit of revenge having
supported me all the way against every other reflection, My first care
was to hire a lodging, in which I kept myself very retired, assumed a
feigned name, that my character and situation might be better
concealed. It was not long before I found out the house of my lover,
whither I immediately repaired in a transport of rage, determined to
act some desperate deed for the satisfaction of my despair, though the
hurry of my spirits would not permit me to concert or resolve upon a
particular plan. When I demanded admission to Lothario (so let me call
him), I was desired to send up my name and business; but this I
refused, telling the porter I had business for his master’s private
ear; upon which I was conducted into a parlour until he should be
informed of my request. There I remained about a quarter of an hour,
when a servant entered and told me his master was engaged with company,
and begged to be excused at that time. My temper could hold out no
longer. I pulled out a poniard from my bosom, where I had concealed it,
and rushing out flew up stairs like a fury, exclaiming, “Where’s this
perfidious villain? could I plunge this dagger into his false heart, I
should then die satisfied!” The noise I made alarmed not only the
servants, but the company also, who hearing my threats came forward to
the staircase to see was the matter. I was seized, disarmed, and
withheld by two footmen; and in this situation felt the most exquisite
torture in beholding my undoer approach with his young wife. I could
not endure the sight, was deprived of my senses, and fell into a severe
fit, during which I know not how I was treated; but when I recovered
the use of reflection, found myself on a bed in a paltry apartment,
where I was attended by an old woman, who asked a thousand impertinent
questions relating to my condition, and informed me that my behaviour
had thrown the whole family into confusion; that Lothario affirmed I
was mad, and proposed to have me sent to Bedlam; but my lady persuaded
herself there was more in my conduct than he cared should be known, and
had taken to her bed on bare suspicion, having first ordered that I
should be narrowly looked to. I heard all she said without making any
other reply than desiring she would do me the favour to call a chair;
but this she told me could not be done without her master’s consent,
which, however, was easily procured, and I was conveyed to my lodgings
in a state of mind that baffles all description. The agitation of my
thoughts produced a fever, which brought on a miscarriage; and I
believe it is well for my conscience that heaven thus disposed of my
burden; for let me own to you with penitence and horror, if I had
brought a living child into the world, my frenzy would have prompted me
to sacrifice the little innocent to my resentment of the father’s
infidelity.

‘After this event my rage abated, and my hate became more deliberate
and calm: when one day my landlady informed me that there was a
gentleman below who desired to see me, he having something of
consequence to impart, which he was sure would contribute to my peace
of mind. I was exceedingly alarmed at this declaration, which I
attempted to interpret a thousand ways; and before I came to any
determination he entered my room, with an apology for intruding without
my knowledge or consent. I surveyed him some time, and not being able
to recollect his face, demanded, with a faltering accent, what his
business was with me? Upon which he desired I would give him a
particular audience, and he did not doubt of communicating something
that would conduce to my satisfaction and repose. As I thought myself
sufficiently guarded against any violence, I granted his request, and
bade the woman withdraw. The stranger, then advancing, gave me to
understand that he was well acquainted with the particulars of my
story, having been informed of them from Lothario’s own mouth—that from
the time he knew my misfortunes he had entertained a detestation for
the author of them, which had of late been increased and inflamed to a
desire of revenge, by a piece of dishonourable conduct towards him—that
hearing of my melancholy situation, he had come with an intention of
offering his assistance and comfort, and was ready to espouse my
quarrel, and forthwith take vengeance on my seducer, provided I would
grant him one consideration, which, he hoped, I should see no reason to
refuse. Had all the artifice of hell been employed in composing a
persuasive, it could not have had a more instantaneous or favourable
effect than this discourse had upon me. I was transported with a
delirium of gloomy joy. The contract was made; he devoted himself to my
revenge, undertook to murder Lothario that very night, and to bring me
an account of his death before morning. Accordingly, about two of the
clock, he was introduced to my chamber, and assured me that my
perfidious lover was no more: that although he was not entitled to such
an honourable proceeding, he had fairly challenged him to the field,
where he upbraided him with his treachery towards me, for whom, he told
me, his sword was drawn, and after a few passes left him weltering in
his blood. I was so savaged by my wrongs, that I delighted in the
recital of this adventure, made him repeat the particulars and feasted
my eyes on the blood that remained on his clothes and sword. My
imagination was so engrossed by these ideas, that in my sleep I dreamed
Lothario appeared before me pale, mangled, and bloody, blamed my
rashness, protested his innocence, and pleaded his cause so
pathetically, that I was convinced of his fidelity, and waked in a fit
of horror and remorse. I dropped asleep again, and the same apparition
recurred to my fancy. In short, I passed the night in great misery, and
looked upon my avenger with such abhorrence, that in the morning,
perceiving my aversion, he insinuated there was still a possibility of
Lothario’s recovery: it was quite true he left him wounded on the
ground, but not quite dead, and perhaps his hurts might not be mortal.
At these words I started up, bade him fly for intelligence, and if he
could not bring me tidings of Lothario’s safety, at least consult his
own, and never return; for I was resolved to surrender myself to
justice, and declare all I knew of the affair, that, if possible I
might expiate my own guilt, by incurring the rigours of a sincere
repentance and ignominious death. He very coolly represented the
unreasonableness of my prejudice against him, who had done nothing but
what his love of me inspired, and honour justified: that now he had, at
the risk of his life, been subservient to my revenge, I was about to
discard him as an infamous agent, occasionally necessary; and that,
even if he should be so lucky as to bring news of Lothario’s safety, it
was probable my former resentment might revive, and I would upbraid him
with having failed in his undertaking. I assured him, that on the
contrary, he should be dearer to me than ever, as I then should be
convinced he acted more on the principles of a man of honour than on
those of a mercenary assassin, and scorned to take away the life of an
adversary, how inveterate soever, which fortune had put in his power.
“Well, then madam,” said he, “whatever may have happened, I shall find
it no difficult matter to acquit myself in point of honour;” and took
his leave in order to inquire into the consequences of his duel. I was
now more sensible than ever of the degrees of guilt and misery; all the
affliction I had suffered hitherto was owing to my own credulity and
weakness, and my conscience could only accuse me of venial crimes; but
now that I looked upon myself as a murderer, it is impossible to
express the terrors of my imagination, which was incessantly haunted by
the image of the deceased, and my bosom stung with the most exquisite
agonies, of which I saw no end. At length, Horatio (for so I shall call
my new friend) returned, and telling me I had nothing to fear,
delivered into my hands a billet containing these words.

“Madam,
    “As I understand it is of consequence to your peace, I take this
    liberty to inform you, that the wounds I received from Horatio are
    not mortal. This satisfaction my humanity could not deny, even to a
    person who has endeavoured to disturb the repose as well as the
    life of


“Lothario.”


‘Being well acquainted with this hand, I had no reason to suspect an
imposition in this letter, which I read over and over with a transport
of joy, and caressed Horatio so much that he appeared the happiest man
alive. Thus was I won from despair by the menaces of a greater
misfortune than that which depressed me. Griefs are like usurpers,—the
most powerful deposes all the rest. But my raptures were not lasting:
that very letter which in a manner re-established my tranquillity, in a
little time banished my peace. His unjust reproaches, while they waked
my resentment, recalled my former happiness, and filled my soul with
rage and sorrow. Horatio, perceiving the situation of my mind,
endeavoured to divert my chagrin, by treating me with all the
amusements and entertainments of the town. I was gratified with every
indulgence I could desire; introduced into the company of women in my
own situation, by whom an uncommon deference was paid to me; and I
began to lose all remembrance of my former condition, when an accident
brought it back to my view with all its interesting circumstances.
Diverting myself one day with some newspapers, which I had not before
perused, the following advertisement attracted my attention:

‘“Whereas a young gentlewoman disappeared from her father’s house in
the county of —, about the end of September, on account (as is
supposed) of some uneasiness of mind, and has not been as yet heard of.
Whoever will give any information about her to Mr. — of Gray’s Inn,
shall be handsomely rewarded; or if she will return to the arms of her
disconsolate parent, she will be received with the utmost tenderness,
whatever reason she may have to think otherwise, and may be the means
of prolonging the life of a father already weighed down almost to the
grave with age and sorrow.”

‘This pathetic remonstrance had such an effect on me, that I was fully
resolved to return, like the prodigal son, and implore the forgiveness
of him who gave me life; but, alas! Upon inquiry, I found he had paid
his debt to nature a month before, lamenting my absence to his last
hour, having left his fortune to a stranger, as a mark of his
resentment of my unkind and undutiful behaviour. Penetrated with
remorse on this occasion, I sank into the most profound melancholy, and
considered myself as the immediate cause of his death. I lost all
relish for company; and, indeed, most of my acquaintances no sooner
perceived my change of temper, than they abandoned me. Horatio,
disgusted at my insensibility, or from some other cause, became colder
and colder every day, till at last he left me altogether, without
making any apology for his conduct, or securing me against the miseries
of want, as a man of honour ought to have done, considering the share
he had in my ruin; for I afterwards learned, that the quarrel between
Lothario and him was a story trumped up to rid the one of my
importunities, and give the other a recommendation to me, which, it
seems, he desired, upon seeing me at the house of my seducer. Reduced
to this extremity, I cursed my own simplicity, uttered horrid
imprecations against the treachery of Horatio; and, as I became every
day more and more familiarised to the loss of innocence, resolved to be
revenged on the sex in general, by practising their own arts upon
themselves. Nor was an opportunity long wanting: an old gentlewoman,
under pretence of sympathising, visited me, and after having condoled
me on my misfortunes, and professed a disinterested friendship, began
to display the art of her occupation, in encomiums on my beauty, and
invectives against the wretch who had forsaken me; insinuating withal,
that it would be my own fault if I did not still make my fortune by the
extraordinary qualifications with which nature had endowed me. I soon
understood her drift, and gave her such encouragement to explain
herself, that we came to an agreement immediately to divide whatever
profits might accrue from such gallants as she should introduce to my
acquaintance. The first stroke of my dissimulation was practised upon a
certain judge, to whom I was recommended by this matron as an innocent
creature just arrived from the country.’




CHAPTER XXIII


Miss Williams interrupted by a bailiff, who carries her to the
Marshalsea—I accompany her—prove she is not the person named in the
writ—the bailiff is fain to discharge her—we shift our lodging—her
story, and my reflections thereupon—progress of a common woman of the
town—resolves to quit that way of life


Her story was here interrupted by a rap at the door, which I no sooner
opened, than three or four terrible fellows rushed in, one of whom
accosted my fellow-lodger thus: “Madam, your servant—you must do me the
favour to come along with me, I have a writ against you.” While the
bailiff (for so he was) spoke thus, his followers surrounded the
prisoner, and began to handle her very roughly. This treatment incensed
me so much, that I snatched up the poker and would certainly have used
it in defence of the lady, without any regard to the strength and
number of her adversaries, had she not begged me, with a composure of
countenance for which I could not account, to use no violence on her
behalf, which could be of no service to her, but might be very
detrimental to myself. Then turning to the leader of this formidable
troop, she desired to see the writ, and having perused it, said with a
faltering voice, “I am not the person whose name is here mentioned,
arrest me at your peril.” “Ay, ay, madam,” replied the catchpole. “We
shall prove your identity. In the meantime, whither will you be pleased
to be carried, to my house, or to jail?” “If I must be confined,” said
she, “I would rather be in your house than in a common jail.” “Well,
well,” answered he, “if you have money enough in your pocket, you shall
be entertained like a princess.” But when she acquainted him with her
poverty, he swore he never gave credit, and ordered one of his
myrmidons to call a coach, to carry her to the Marshalsea at once.
While they waited for the convenience, she took me aside, and bade me
be under no concern on her account, for she knew how to extricate
herself from this difficulty very soon, and perhaps gain something by
the occasion. Although her discourse was a mystery to me, I was very
well pleased with her assurance; and when the coach came to the door, I
offered to accompany her to prison, to which proposal, after much
entreaty, she consented.

When we arrived at the gate of the Marshalsea, our conductor alighted,
and having demanded entrance, presented the writ to the turnkey, who no
sooner perceived the name of Elizabeth Cary than he cried, “Ah, ah: my
old acquaintance Bet! I’m glad to see thee with all my heart.” So
saying, he opened the coach door, and helped her to dismount; but when
he observed her face, he started back, saying, “Who have we got here?”
The bailiff, alarmed at this interrogation, cried with some emotion,
“Who should it be but the prisoner, Elizabeth Cary?” The turnkey
replied, “That Elizabeth Cary! I’ll be hanged if that’s Elizabeth Cary
more than my grandmother.” Here the lady thought fit to interpose, and
tell the catchpole, if he had taken her word for it at first, he might
have saved himself and her a great deal of trouble. “It may be so,”
answered he, “but I’ll have further evidence that you are not the
person, before you and I part.” “Yes, yes,” said she, “you shall have
further evidence, to your cost.” Then we adjourned into the lodge, and
called for a bottle of wine, where my companion wrote a direction to
two of her acquaintance, and begged the favour of me to go to their
lodgings, and request them to come to her immediately. I found them
together at a house in Brydges Street, Drury Lane, and as they were
luckily unengaged, they set out with me in a hackney-coach without
hesitation, after I had related the circumstances of the affair, which
flattered them with the hopes of seeing a bailiff trounced; for there
is an antipathy as natural between women of that class and bailiffs, as
that subsisting between mice and cats. Accordingly, when they entered
the lodge, they embraced the prisoner very affectionately by the name
of Nancy Williams, and asked how long she had been nabbed, and for
what? On hearing the particulars of her adventure repeated, they
offered to swear before a justice of peace that she was not the person
mentioned in the writ, whom, it seems, they all knew; but the bailiff,
who was by the time convinced of his mistake, told them he would not
put them to that trouble. “Ladies,” said he, “there’s no harm done—you
shall give me leave to treat you with another bottle, and then we’ll
part friends.” This proposal was not at all relished by the sisterhood:
and Miss Williams told him, sure he did not imagine her such a fool as
to be satisfied with a paltry glass of sour wine? Here the turnkey
interrupted her by affirming with an oath, that the wine was as good as
ever was tipped over tongue. “Well,” continued she, “that may be, but
were it the best of champagne, it is no recompense for the damage I
have suffered both in character and health, by being wrongfully dragged
to jail; at this rate, no innocent person is safe, since an officer of
justice, out of malice, private pique, or mistake, may injure and
oppress the subject with impunity; but, thank heaven, I live under the
protection of laws that will not suffer such insults to pass
unpunished, and I know very well how to procure redress.” Mr. Vulture,
for that was the bailiff’s name, finding he had to deal with one who
would not be imposed upon, began to look very sullen and perplexed,
and, leaning his forehead on his hand, entered into a deliberation with
himself, which lasted a few minutes, and then broke out in a volley of
dreadful curses against the old jade our landlady, as he called her,
for having misinformed him. After much wrangling and swearing, the
matter was referred to the decision of the turnkey, who calling for the
other bottle, mulcted the bailiff in all the liquor that had been
drunk, coach hire, and a couple of guineas for the use of the
plaintiff. The money was immediately deposited; Miss Williams gratified
the two evidences with one half, and putting the other in her pocket
drove home with me, leaving the catchpole grumbling over his loss, yet
pleased in the main, for having so cheaply got clear of a business that
might have cost him ten times the sum, and his place to boot. This
guinea was a very seasonable relief to us, who were reduced to great
necessity, six of my shirts, and almost all my clothes, except those on
my back, having been either pawned or sold for our maintenance before
this happened. As we resented the behaviour of our landlady, our first
care was to provide ourselves with another lodging, whither we removed
next day, with an intention to keep ourselves as retired as possible,
until our cure should be completed. When we were fixed in our new
habitation, I entreated her to finish the story of her life, which she
pursued in this manner:—

‘The success of our experiment on the judge encouraged us to practice
the same deceit on others; but this harvest lasted not long, my
character taking air, and my directress deserting me for some new game.
Then I took lodgings near Charing-Cross, at two guineas a week, and
began to entertain company in a public manner; but my income being too
small to defray my expenses, I was obliged to retrench, and enter into
articles with the porters of certain taverns, who undertook to find
employment enough for me, provided I would share my profits with them.
Accordingly, I was almost every night engaged with company, among whom
I was exposed to every mortification, danger, and abuse, that flow from
drunkenness and brutality. As my spirit was not sufficiently humbled to
the will, nor my temper calculated for the conversation of my gallants,
it was impossible for me to overcome an aversion I felt for my
profession, which manifested itself in a settled gloom on my
countenance, and disgusted those sons of mirth and riot so much, that I
was frequently used in a shocking manner, and kicked down stairs with
disgrace. The messengers, seeing me disagreeable to their benefactors
and employers, seldom troubled me with a call, and I began to find
myself almost totally neglected.

‘To contribute towards my support I was fain to sell my watch, rings,
trinkets, with the best part of my clothes; and I was one evening
musing by myself on misery before me when I received a message from a
tavern, whither I repaired in a chair, and was introduced to a
gentleman dressed like an officer, with whom I supped in a sumptuous
manner. In the morning, when I awoke, I found my gallant had got up,
and, drawing aside the curtain, could not perceive him in the room. I
waited a full hour for his return, and then in the greatest perplexity,
rose up and rang the bell. When the waiter came to the door, he found
it locked, and desired admittance, which I granted, after observing,
with great surprise, that the key remained on the inside, as when we
went to bed. I no sooner inquired for the captain, than the fellow,
staring with a distracted look, cried, “How, madam, is he not abed?”
And when he was satisfied as to that particular, ran into a closet
adjoining to the chamber, the window of which he found open. Through
this the adventurer had got upon a wall, front whence he dropped down
into a court and escaped, leaving me to be answerable not only for the
reckoning, but also for a large silver tankard and posset-bowl, which
he had carried off with him.

‘It is impossible to describe the consternation I was under, when I saw
myself detained as a thief’s accomplice; for I was looked upon in that
light, and carried before a justice, who mistaking my confusion for a
sign of guilt committed me, after a short examination, to Bridewell,
having admonished me, as the only means to save my life, to turn
evidence, and impeach my confederate. I now concluded the vengeance of
Heaven had overtaken me, and that I must soon finish my career by an
ignominious death. This reflection sank so deep into my soul, that I
was for some days deprived of my reason, and actually believed myself
in hell, tormented by fiends. Indeed, there needs not a very
extravagant imagination to form that idea: for of all the scenes on
earth that of Bridewell approaches nearest the notion I had always
entertained of the regions. Here I saw nothing but rage, anguish and
impiety, and heard nothing but groans, curses, and blasphemy. In the
midst of this hellish crew, I was subjected to the tyranny of a
barbarian, who imposed upon me tasks that I could not possibly perform,
and then punished my incapacity with the utmost rigour and inhumanity.
I was often whipped into a swoon, and lashed out of it (during which
miserable interval, I was robbed by my fellow-prisoners of everything
about me, even to my cap, shoes, and stockings): I was not only
destitute of necessaries, but even of food, so that my wretchedness was
extreme. Not one of my acquaintance to whom I imparted my situation,
would grant me the least succour or regard, on pretence of my being
committed for theft, and my landlord refused to part with some of my
own clothes which I sent for, because I was indebted to him for a
week’s lodging.

‘Overwhelmed with calamity, I grew desperate, and resolved to put an
end to my grievances and life together: for this purpose I got up in
the middle of the night, when I thought everybody around me asleep, and
fixing one end of a large hook in the ceiling, that supported the
scales on which the hemp is weighed, I stood upon a chair, and making a
noose on the other end, put my neck into it, with an intention to hang
myself; but before I could adjust the knot I was surprised and
prevented by two women, who had been awake all the while and suspected
my design. In the morning, my attempt was published among the prisoners
and punished with thirty stripes, the pain of which, co-operating with
my disappointment and disgrace, bereft me of my senses, and threw me
into an ecstacy of madness, during which I tore the flesh from my bones
with my teeth, and dashed my head against the pavement; so that they
were obliged to set a watch over me, to restrain me from doing further
mischief to myself and others. This fit of frenzy continued three days,
at the end of which I grew calm and sullen: but as the desire of making
away with myself still remained, I came to a determination of starving
myself to death, and with that view refused all sustenance.

‘Whether it was owing to the want of opposition, or to the weakness of
nature, I know not; but on the second day of my fast, I found my
resolution considerably impaired, and the calls of hunger almost
insupportable. At this critical conjuncture a lady was brought into the
prison, with whom I had contracted an acquaintance while I lived with
Horatio; she was then on the same footing as I was, but afterwards
quarrelling with her gallant, and not finding another to her mind,
altered her scheme of life, and set up a coffee-house among the
hundreds in Drury, where she entertained gentlemen with claret, arrack,
and the choice of half-a-dozen damsels who lived in her house. This
serviceable matron having neglected to gratify a certain justice for
the connivance she enjoyed, was indicted at the quarter sessions, in
consequence of which her bevy was dispersed, and herself committed to
Bridewell. She had not been long there before she learned my disaster,
and coming up to me, after a compliment of condolence, inquired into
the particulars of my fate. While we were engaged in discourse
together, the master came and told me, that the fellow on whose account
I had suffered was taken, that he had confessed the theft, and cleared
me of any concern in the affair; for which reason he, the master, had
orders to discharge me, and that I was from that moment free.

‘This piece of news soon banished all thoughts of death, and had such
an instantaneous effect on my countenance, that Mrs. Coupler (the lady
then present), hoping to find her account in me, very generously
offered to furnish me with what necessaries I wanted, and take me into
her own house as soon as she could compromise matters with the
justices. The conditions of her offer were, that I should pay three
guineas weekly for my board, and a reasonable consideration besides,
for the use of such clothes and ornaments as she should supply me with,
to be deducted from the first profits of my occupation. These were hard
terms, but not to be rejected by one who was turned out helpless and
naked into the wide world, without a friend to pity or assist her. I
therefore embraced her proposal, and she being bailed in a few hours,
took me home with her in a coach. As I was by this time conscious of
having formerly disgusted my admirers by my reserved loud haughty
behaviour, I now endeavoured to conquer that disposition, and the
sudden change of my fortune giving me a flow of spirits, I appeared in
the most winning and gay manner I could assume. Having the advantage of
a good voice and education, I exerted my talents to the uttermost, and
soon became the favourite with all company. This success alarmed the
pride and jealousy of Mrs. Coupler, who could not bear the thoughts of
being eclipsed: she therefore made a merit of her envy, and whispered
among the customers that I was unsound. There needed no more to ruin my
reputation and blast my prosperity; everybody shunned me with marks of
aversion and disdain, and in a very short time I was as solitary as
ever. Want of gallants was attended with want of money to satisfy my
malicious landlady, who having purposely given me credit to the amount
of eleven pounds, took out a writ against me and I was arrested in her
own house. Though the room was crowded with people when the bailiff
entered, not one of them had compassion enough to mollify my
prosecutrix, far less to pay the debt; they even laughed at my tears,
and one of them bade me be of good cheer, for I should not want
admirers in Newgate.

‘At this instant a sea-lieutenant came in, and seeing my plight, began
to inquire into the circumstances of my misfortune. “Harkee, my girl,”
he inquired “how far have you overrun the constable?” I told him that
the debt amounted to eleven pounds, besides the expenses of the writ.
“An that be all,” said he, “you shan’t go to the bilboes this bout.”
And taking out his purse, he paid the money, discharged the bailiff,
and telling me I had got into the wrong port, advised me to seek out a
more convenient harbour, where I could be safely hove down; for which
purpose he made me a present of five guineas more. I was so touched
with this singular piece of generosity, that for some time I had not
power to thank him. However, as soon as I recollected myself, I begged
the favour of him to go with me to the next tavern, where I explained
the nature of my disaster, and convinced him of the falsehood of what
was reported to my prejudice so effectually, that he from that moment
attached himself to me, and we lived in great harmony together, until
he was obliged to go to sea, where he perished in a storm.

‘Having lost my benefactor, and almost consumed the remains of his
bounty, I saw myself in danger of relapsing into my former necessity,
and began to be very uneasy at the prospect of bailiffs and jails! when
one of the sisterhood advised me to take lodgings in a part of the town
where I was unknown, and pass for an heiress, by which artifice I might
entrap somebody to be my husband, who would possibly be able to allow
me a handsome maintenance, or at worst screen me from the dread and
danger of a prison, by becoming liable for whatever debts I should
contract. I approved of this scheme, towards the execution of which my
companion clubbed her wardrobe, and undertook to live with me in
quality of my maid, with the proviso that she should be reimbursed and
handsomely considered out of the profits of my success. She was
immediately detached to look out for a convenient place, and that very
day hired a genteel apartment in Park Street, whither I moved in a
couch loaded with her baggage, and my own. I made my first appearance
in a blue riding habit trimmed with silver; and my maid acted her part
so artfully, that in a day or two my fame spread all over the
neighbourhood, and I was said to be a rich heiress just arrived from
the country. This report brought a swarm of gay young fellows about me;
but I soon found them to be all indigent adventurers like myself, who
crowded to me like crows to a carrion, with a view of preying upon my
fortune. I maintained, however, the appearance of wealth as long as
possible, in hopes of gaining some admirer more for my purpose, and at
length attracted the regard of one who would have satisfied my wishes,
and managed matters so well, that a day was actually fixed for our
nuptials. In the interim, he begged leave to introduce an intimate
friend to me, which request, as I could not refuse, I had the extreme
mortification and surprise to see, next night, in that friend, my old
keeper Horatio, who no sooner beheld me than he changed colour, but had
presence of mind to advance and salute me, bidding me (with a low
voice) be under no apprehension, for he would not expose me. In spite
of his assurance, I could not recover myself so far as to entertain
them, but withdrew to my chamber on pretence of a severe headache, to
the no small concern of my adorer, who took his leave in the tenderest
manner, and went off with his friend.

‘Having imparted my situation to my companion, she found it high time
for us to decamp, and that without any noise, because we were not only
indebted to our landlady, but also to several tradesmen in the
neighbourhood. Our retreat, therefore, was concerted and executed in
this manner: Having packed up all our clothes and moveables in small
parcels, she (on pretence of fetching cordials for me) carried them at
several times to the house of an acquaintance, where she likewise
procured a lodging, to which we retired in the middle of the night,
when every other body in the house was asleep. I was now obliged to aim
at lower game, and accordingly spread my nets among tradespeople, but
found them all too phlegmatic or cautious for my art and attractions,
till at last I became acquainted with you, on whom I practised all my
dexterity; not that I believed you had any fortune, or expectation of
me, but that I might transfer the burden of such debts as I had
incurred, or should contract, from myself to another, and at the same
time avenge myself of your sex, by rendering miserable one who bore
such resemblance to the wretch who ruined me; but Heaven preserved you
from my snares by the discovery you made, which was owing to the
negligence of my maid in leaving the chamber-door unlocked when she
went to buy sugar for breakfast. When I found myself detected and
forsaken by you, I was fain to move my lodging, and dwell two pair of
stairs higher than before. My companion, being disappointed in her
expectations, left me, and I had no other resource than to venture
forth, like the owls in the dark, to pick up a precarious and
uncomfortable subsistence. I have often sauntered between Ludgate Hill
and Charing Cross a whole winter night, exposed not only to the
inclemency of the weather, but likewise to the rage of hunger and
thirst, without being so happy as to meet with one dupe, then creep up
to my garret, in a deplorable draggled condition, sneak to bed, and try
to bury my appetite and sorrows in sleep. When I lighted on some rake
or tradesman reeling home drunk, I frequently suffered the most brutal
treatment, in spite of which I was obliged to affect gaiety and good
humour, though my soul was stung with resentment and disdain, and my
heart loaded with grief and affliction. In the course of these
nocturnal adventures, I was infected with the disease, that in a short
time rendered me the object of my own abhorrence, and drove me to the
retreat where your benevolence rescued me from the jaws of death.’

So much candour and good sense appeared in this lady’s narration, that
I made no scruple of believing every syllable of what she said, and
expressed my astonishment at the variety of miseries she had undergone
in so little time, for all her misfortunes had happened within the
compass of two years; I compared her situation with my own, and found
it a thousand times more wretched. I had endured hardships, ’tis
true—my whole life had been a series of such; and when I looked
forward, the prospect was not much bettered, but then they were become
habitual to me, and consequently I could bear them with less
difficulty. If one scheme of life should not succeed, I could have
recourse to another, and so to a third, veering about to a thousand
different shifts, according to the emergencies of my fate, without
forfeiting the dignity of my character beyond a power of retrieving it,
or subjecting myself wholly to the caprice and barbarity of the world.
On the other hand, she had known and relished the sweets of prosperity,
she had been brought up under the wings of an indulgent parent, in all
the delicacies to which her sex and rank entitled her; and without any
extravagance of hope, entertained herself with the view of
uninterrupted happiness through the whole scene of life. How fatal
then, how tormenting, how intolerable, must her reverse of fortune
be!—a reverse, that not only robs her of these external comforts, and
plunges her into all the miseries of want, but also murders her peace
of mind, and entails upon her the curse of eternal infamy! Of all
professions I pronounced that of a courtesan the most deplorable, and
her of all courtesans the most unhappy. She allowed my observation to
be just in the main, but at the same time affirmed that notwithstanding
the disgraces which had fallen to her share, she had not been so
unlucky in the condition of a prostitute as many others of the same
community. “I have often seen,” said she, “while I strolled about the
streets at midnight, a number of naked wretches reduced to rags and
filth, huddled together like swine, in the corner of a dark alley, some
of whom, but eighteen months before, I had known the favourites of the
town, rolling in affluence, and glittering in all the pomp of equipage
and dress. Miserable wretch that I am! perhaps the same horrors are
decreed for me!” “No!” cried she, after some pause, “I shall never live
to such extremity of distress; my own hand shall open a way for my
deliverance, before I arrive at that forlorn period!” Her condition
filled me with sympathy and compassion: I revered her qualifications,
looked upon her as unfortunate, not criminal, and attended her with
such care and success, that in less than two months her health, as well
as my own, was perfectly re-established. As we often conferred upon our
mutual affairs, and interchanged advice, a thousand different projects
were formed, which, upon further canvassing, appeared impracticable. We
would have gladly gone to service, but who would take us in without
recommendation? At length an expedient occurred to her, of which she
intended to lay hold; and this was, to procure with the first money she
should earn, the homely garb of a country wench, go to some village at
a good distance from town, and come up in a waggon, as a fresh girl for
service: by which means she might be provided for, in a manner much
more suitable to her inclination than her present way of life.




CHAPTER XXIV


I am reduced to a great misery—assaulted on Tower Hill by a press-gang,
who put me on board a tender—my usage there—my arrival on board at a
man-of-war, where I am put in irons, and released by the good offices
of Mr. Thompson, who recommends me as assistant to the surgeon—-he
relates his own story—characters of the captain, surgeon, and first
mate


I applauded the resolution of Miss Williams, who a few days after, was
hired in quality of bar-keeper, by one of the ladies who had witnessed
in her behalf at the Marshalsea, and who since that time had got credit
with a wine merchant, whose favourite she was, to set up a convenient
house of her own. Thither my fellow-lodger repaired, after having taken
leave of me with a torrent of tears, and a thousand protestations of
eternal gratitude; assuring me she would remain in this situation no
longer than she could pick up money sufficient to put her other design
in execution.

As for my own part, I saw no resource but the army or navy, between
which I hesitated so long that I found myself reduced to a starving
condition. My spirit began to accommodate itself to my beggarly fate,
and I became so mean as to go down towards Wapping, with an intention
to inquire for an old schoolfellow, who, I understood, had got the
command of a small coasting vessel then in the river, and implore his
assistance. But my destiny prevented this abject piece of behaviour;
for as I crossed Tower Wharf, a squat tawny fellow with a hanger by his
side, and a cudgel in his hand came up to me, calling, “Yo ho! brother,
you must come along with me.” As I did not like his appearance, instead
of answering his salutation, I quickened my pace, in hope of ridding
myself of his company; upon which he whistled aloud, and immediately
another sailor appeared before me, who laid hold of me by the collar,
and began to drag me along. Not being in a humour to relish such
treatment, I disengaged myself of the assailant, and, with one blow of
my cudgel, laid him motionless on the ground; and perceiving myself
surrounded in a trice by ten or a dozen more, exerted myself with such
dexterity and success, that some of my opponents were fain to attack me
with drawn cutlasses; and after an obstinate engagement, in which I
received a large wound on my head, and another on my left cheek, I was
disarmed, taken prisoner, and carried on board a pressing tender,
where, after being pinioned like a malefactor, I was thrust down into
the hold among a parcel of miserable wretches, the sight of whom well
nigh distracted me. As the commanding officer had not humanity enough
to order my wounds to be dressed, and I could not use my own hands, I
desired one of my fellow captives who was unfettered, to take a
handkerchief out of my pocket, and tie it round my head, to stop the
bleeding. He pulled out my handkerchief, ’tis true, but instead of
applying it to the use for which I designed it, went to the grating of
the hatchway, and, with astonishing composure, sold it before my face
to a bumboat woman (1) then on board, for a quart of gin, with which he
treated his companions, regardless of my circumstances and entreaties.

(1) A Bumboat woman is one who sells bread, cheese, greens, liquor, and
fresh potatoes to the sailors, in a small boat that lies alongside the
ship


I complained bitterly of this robbery to the midshipman on deck,
telling him at the same time, that unless my hurts were dressed, I
should bleed to death. But compassion was a weakness of which no man
could justly accuse this person, who, squirting a mouthful of dissolved
tobacco upon me through the gratings, told me “I was a mutinous dog,
and that I might die for anything he cared!” Finding there was no other
remedy, I appealed to patience, and laid up this usage in my memory, to
be called at a more fitting opportunity. In the meantime, loss of
blood, vexation, and want of food, contributed, with the noisome stench
of the place, to throw me into a swoon, out of which I was recovered by
a tweak of the nose, administered by the tar who stood sentinel over
us, who at the same time regaled me with a draught of flip, and
comforted me with the hopes of being put on board of the Thunder next
day, where I should be freed of my handcuffs, and cured of my wounds by
the doctor. I no sooner heard him name the Thunder, than I asked if he
had belonged to that ship long; and be giving me to understand he had
belonged to her five years, I inquired if he knew Lieutenant Bowling?
“Know Lieutenant Bowling!” said he, “Odds my life! and that I do; and a
good seaman he is as ever stepped upon forecastle, and a brave fellow
as ever cracked biscuit—none of your Guinea pigs, nor your fresh water,
wish-washy, fair-weather fowls. Many a taut gale of wind have honest
Tom Bowling and I weathered together. Here’s his health, with all my
heart: wherever he is, a-loft, or a-low, the lieutenant needs not be
ashamed to show himself.” I was so much affected with this eulogium,
that I could not refrain from telling him that I was Lieutenant
Bowling’s kinsman; in consequence of which connection, he expressed his
inclination to serve me, and when he was relieved, brought some cold
boiled beef in a platter, and biscuit, on which we supped plentifully,
and afterwards drank another can of flip together. While we were thus
engaged, he recounted a great many exploits of my uncle, who, I found,
was very much beloved by the ship’s company, and pitied for the
misfortune that had happened to him in Hispaniola, which I was very
glad to be informed was not so great as I imagined; for Captain Oakum
had recovered of his wounds, and actually at that time commanded the
ship. Having by accident, in my pocket, my uncle’s letter, written from
Port Louis, I gave it my benefactor (whose name was Jack Rattlin) for
his perusal; but honest Jack told me frankly he could not read, and
desired to know the contents, which I immediately communicated. When he
heard that part of it in which he says he had written to his landlord
in Deal, he cried, “Body o’ me! that was old Ben Block; he was dead
before the letter came to hand. Ey, ey, had Ben been alive, Lieutenant
Bowling would have had no occasion to skulk so long. Honest Ben was the
first man that taught him to hand, reef, and steer. Well, well, we must
all die, that’s certain—we must all come to port sooner or later, at
sea or on shore—we must be fast moored one day: death’s like the best
bower anchor, as the saying is—it will bring us all up.” I could not
but signify my approbation of the justness of Jack’s reflections, and
inquired into the occasion of the quarrel between Captain Oakum and my
uncle, which he explained in this manner: “Captain Oakum, to be sure,
is a good man enough—besides, he’s my commander; but what’s that to me?
I do my duty, and value no man’s anger of a rope’s end. Now the report
goes, as how he’s a lord, or baron knight’s brother, whereby (d’ye see
me,) he carries a straight arm, and keeps aloof from his officers,
though mayhap they may be as good men in the main as he. Now we lying
at anchor in Tuberon Bay, Lieutenant Bowling had the middle watch, and
as he always kept a good look out, he made (d’ye see) three lights in
the offing, whereby he ran down to the great cabin for orders, and
found the captain asleep; whereupon he waked him, which put him in a
main high passion, and he swore woundily at the lieutenant, and called
him lousy Scotch son of a whore (for, I being then sentinel in the
steerage, heard all), and swab, and lubber, whereby the lieutenant
returned the salute, and they jawed together fore and aft a good spell,
till at last the captain turned out, and, laying hold of a rattan, came
athwart Mr. Bowling’s quarter: whereby he told the captain that, if he
was not his commander, he would heave him overboard, and demanded
satisfaction ashore; whereby in the morning watch, the captain went
ashore in the pinnace, and afterwards the lieutenant carried the cutter
ashore, and so they, leaving the boats’ crews on their oars, went away
together; and so (d’ye see) in less than a quarter of an hour we heard
firing, whereby we made for the place, and found the captain lying
wounded on the beach, and so brought him on board to the doctor, who
cured him in less than six weeks. But the lieutenant clapped on all the
sail he could bear, and had got far enough ahead before we knew
anything of the matter; so that we could never after get sight of him,
for which we were not sorry, because the captain was mainly wrath, and
would certainly have done him a mischief; for he afterwards caused him
to be run on the ship’s books, whereby he lost all his pay, and, if he
should be taken, would be tried as a deserter.”

This account of the captain’s behaviour gave me no advantageous idea of
his character; and I could not help lamenting my own fate, that had
subjected me to such a commander. However, making a virtue of
necessity, I put a good face on the matter, and next day, was, with the
other pressed men, put on board of the “Thunder,” lying at the Nore.
When we came alongside, the mate, who guarded us thither, ordered my
handcuffs to be taken off, that I might get on board the easier; this
circumstance being perceived by some of the company who stood upon the
gangboard to see us enter, one of them called to Jack Rattlin, who was
busied in doing this friendly office for me, “Hey, Jack, what Newgate
galley have you boarded in the river as you came along? Have we not
thieves enow among us already?” Another, observing my wounds, which
remained exposed to the air, told me, my seams were uncaulked, and that
I must be new payed. A third, seeing my hair clotted together with
blood, as it were into distinct cords, took notice, that my bows were
mended with the red ropes, instead of my side. A fourth asked me, if I
could not keep my yards square without iron braces? And, in short, a
thousand witticisms of the same nature were passed upon me before I
could get up the ship’s side.

After we had been all entered upon the ship’s books, I inquired of one
of my shipmates where the surgeon was, that I might have my wounds
dressed, and had actually got as far as the middle deck (for our ship
carried eighty guns), in my way to the cockpit, when I was met by the
same midshipman who had used me so barbarously in the tender: he,
seeing me free from my chains, asked, with an insolent air, who had
released me? To this question, I foolishly answered, with a countenance
that too plainly declared the state of my thoughts, “Whoever did it, I
am persuaded did not consult you in the affair.” I had no sooner
uttered these words, than he cried, “Damn you, you saucy son of a
hitch, I’ll teach you to talk so to your officer.” So saying, he
bestowed on me several severe stripes with a supple jack he had in his
hand: and, going to the commanding officer, made such a report of me,
that I was immediately put in irons by the master-at-arms, and a
sentinel placed over me. Honest Rattlin, as soon as he heard of my
condition, came to me, and administered all the consolation he could,
and then went to the surgeon in my behalf, who sent one of his mates to
dress my wounds. This mate was no other than my old friend Thompson,
with whom I became acquainted at the Navy Office, as before mentioned.
If I knew him at first sight, it was not easy for him to recognise me,
disfigured with blood and dirt, and altered by the misery I had
undergone. Unknown as I was to him, he surveyed me with looks of
compassion, and handled my sores with great tenderness. When he had
applied what he thought proper, and was about to leave me, I asked him
if my misfortunes had disguised me so much that he could not recollect
my face? Upon this address he observed me with great earnestness for
some time, and at length protested he could not recollect one feature
of my countenance. To keep him no longer in suspense, I told him my
name, which when he heard, he embraced me with affection, and professed
his sorrow at seeing me in such a disagreeable situation. I made him
acquainted with my story, and, when he heard how inhumanly I had been
used in the tender, he left me abruptly, assuring me I should see him
again soon. I had scarce time to wonder at his sudden departure, when
the master-at-arms came to the place of my confinement, and bade me
follow him to the quarter-deck, where I was examined by the first
lieutenant, who commanded the ship in the absence of the captain,
touching the treatment I had received in the tender from my friend the
midshipman, who was present to confront me.

I recounted the particulars of his behaviour to me, not only in the
tender, but since my being on board the ship, part of which being
proved by the evidence of Jack Rattlin and others, who had no great
devotion for my oppressor, I was discharged from confinement, to make
way for him, who was delivered to the master-at-arms to take his turn
in the bilboes. And this was not the only satisfaction I enjoyed, for I
was, at the request of the surgeon, exempted from all other duty than
that of assisting his mates, in making and administering medicines to
the sick. This good office I owed to the friendship of Mr. Thompson,
who had represented me in such a favourable light to the surgeon, that
he demanded me of the lieutenant to supply the place of his third mate,
who was lately dead. When I had obtained this favour, my friend
Thompson carried me down to the cockpit, which is the place allotted
for the habitation of the surgeon’s mates; and when he had shown me
their berth (as he called it), I was filled with astonishment and
horror, We descended by divers ladders to a space as dark as a dungeon,
which, I understood, was immersed several feet under water, being
immediately above the hold. I had no sooner approached this dismal
gulph, than my nose was saluted with an intolerable stench of putrified
cheese and rancid butter, that issued from an apartment at the foot of
the ladder, resembling a chandler’s shop, where, by the faint
glimmering of a candle, I could perceive a man with a pale, meagre
countenance, sitting behind a kind of desk, having spectacles on his
nose, and a pen in his hand. This (I learned of Mr. Thompson) was the
ship’s steward, who sat there to distribute provision to the several
messes, and to mark what each received. He therefore presented my name
to him, and desired I might be entered in his mess; then, taking a
light in his hand, conducted me to the place of his residence, which
was a square of about six feet, surrounded with the medicine-chest,
that of the first mate, his own, and a board by way of table fastened
to the after powder room; it was also inclosed with canvas nailed round
to the beams of the ship, to screen us from the cold, as well as from
the view of the midshipmen and quartermaster, who lodged within the
cable-tiers on each side of us. In this gloomy mansion he entertained
me with some cold suit pork, which he brought from a sort of locker,
fixed above the table: and calling for the boy of the mess, sent for a
can of beer, of which he made excellent flip to crown the banquet.

By this time I began to recover my spirits, which had been exceedingly
depressed with the appearance of everything about me, and could no
longer refrain from asking the particulars of Mr. Thompson’s fortune
since I had seen him in London. He told me, that being disappointed in
his expectations of borrowing money to gratify the rapacious s—t—ry at
the Navy Office, he found himself utterly unable to subsist any longer
in town, and had actually offered his service, in quality of mate, to
the surgeon of a merchant ship, bound to Guinea on the slaving trade;
when, one morning, a young fellow, of whom he had some acquaintance,
came to his lodgings, and informed him that he had seen a warrant made
out in his name at the Navy Office, for surgeon’s second mate of a
third-rate. This unexpected piece of good news he could scarcely
believe to be true, more especially as he had been found qualified at
Surgeons’ Hall for third mate only; but that he might not be wanting to
himself, he went thither to be assured, and actually found it so:
whereupon, demanding his warrant, it was delivered to him, and the
oaths administered immediately. That very afternoon he went to
Gravesend in the tilt-boat, from whence he took place in the tide-coach
for Rochester; next morning got on board the “Thunder,” for which he
was appointed, then lying in the harbour at Chatham; and the same day
was mustered by the clerk of the checque. And well it was for him that
such expedition was used; for, in less than twelve hours after his
arrival, another William Thompson came on board, affirming that he was
the person for whom the warrant was expedited, and that the other was
an impostor.

My friend was grievously alarmed at this accident, the more so, as his
namesake had very much the advantage over him both in assurance and
dress. However, to acquit himself of the suspicion of imposture, he
produced several letters written from Scotland to him in that name,
and, recollecting that his indentures were in a box on board, he
brought them up, and convinced all present that he had not assumed a
name which did not belong to him. His competitor, enraged that they
should hesitate in doing him justice (for to be sure the warrant had
been designed for him), behaved with so much indecent heat, that the
commanding officer (who was the same gentleman I had seen) and the
surgeon were offended at his presumption, and making a point of it with
their friends in town, in less than a week got the first confirmed in
his station. “I have been on board,” said he, “ever since; and, as this
way of life is becoming familiar to me, have no cause to complain of my
situation. The surgeon is a good-natured, indolent man; the first mate
(who is now on shore on duty) is indeed a little proud and choleric, as
all Welshmen are, but in the main a friendly honest fellow. The
lieutenants I have no concern with; and, as for the captain, he is too
much of a gentleman to know a surgeon’s mate, even by sight.”




CHAPTER XXV


The behaviour of Mr. Morgan—his pride, displeasure, and generosity—the
economy of our mess described—Thomson’s further friendship—the nature
of my duty explained—the situation of the sick


While he was thus discoursing to me, we heard a voice on the cockpit
ladder pronounce with great vehemence, in a strange dialect, “The devil
and his dam blow me from the top of Monchdenny, if I go to him before
there is something in my pelly. Let his nose be as yellow as saffron,
or as plue as a pell (look you), or as green as a leek, ’tis all one.”
To this declaration somebody answered, “So it seems my poor messmate
must part his cable for want of a little assistance. His foretopsail is
loose already; and besides the doctor ordered you to overhaul him; but
I see you don’t mind what your master says.” Here he was interrupted
with, “Splutter and cons! you lousy tog, who do you call my master? Get
you gone to the doctor, and tell him my birth, and education, and my
abilities; and moreover, my behaviour is as good as his, or any
shentleman’s (no disparagement to him,) in the whole world. Cot pless
my soul I does he think, or conceive, or imagine, that I am a horse, or
an ass, or a goat, to trudge backwards and forwards, and upwards and
downwards, and by sea and by land; at his will and pleasure? Go your
ways, you rapscallion, and tell Doctor Atkins that I desire and request
that he will give a look upon the tying man, and order something for
him, if he be dead or alive, and I will see him take it by and by, when
my craving stomach is satisfied, look you.” At this, the other went
away, saying, “that if they should serve him so when he was dying, by
God he would be foul of them in the other world.” Here Mr. Thompson let
me know, that the person we heard was Mr. Morgan, the first mate, who
was just come on board from the hospital, whither he had attended some
of the sick in the morning; at the same time I saw him come into the
berth. He was a short thick man, with a face garnished with pimples, a
snub nose turned up at the end, an excessive wide mouth, and little
fiery eyes, surrounded with skin puckered up in innumerable wrinkles.
My friend immediately made him acquainted with my case; when he
regarded me with a very lofty look, but without speaking, set down a
bundle he had in his hand, and approached the cupboard, which, when he
had opened, he exclaimed in a great passion, “Cot is my life, all the
pork is gone, as I am a Christian!” Thompson then gave him to
understand, that, as I had been brought on board half famished, he
could do no less than to entertain me with what was in the locker, and
the rather as he had bid the steward enter me in the mess. Whether this
disappointment made Mr. Morgan more peevish than usual, or he really
thought himself too little regarded by his fellow mate, I know not, but
after some pause, he went on in this manner: “Mr. Thompson, perhaps you
do not use me with all the good manners, and complaisance, and respect
(look you,) that becomes you, because you have not vouchsafed to advise
with me in this affair. I have in my time (look you,) been a man of
some weight, and substance, and consideration, and have kept house and
home, and paid scot and lot, and the king’s taxes; ay, and maintained a
family to boot. And moreover, also, I am your senior, and your older,
and your petter, Mr. Thompson.” “My elder, I’ll allow you to be, but
not my better!” cried Thompson, with some heat. “Cot is my Saviour, and
witness too,” said Morgan, with great vehemence, “that I am more elder,
and therefore more petter by many years than you.” Fearing this dispute
might be attended with some bad consequence, I interposed, and told Mr.
Morgan I was very sorry for having been the occasion of any difference
between him and the second mate; and that, rather than cause the least
breach in their good understanding, I would eat my allowance to myself,
or seek admission into some other company. But Thompson, with more
spirit than discretion (as I thought), insisted upon my remaining where
he had appointed me; and observed that no man, possessed of generosity
and compassion, would have any objection to it, considering my birth
and talents, and the misfortunes I had of late so unjustly undergone.

This was touching Mr. Morgan on the right key, who protested with great
earnestness, that he had no objection to my being received in the mess;
but only complained that the ceremony of asking his consent was not
observed. “As for a sheltenman in distress,” said he, shaking me by the
hand, “I lofe him as I lofe my own powels: for, Cot help me! I have had
vexations enough upon my own pack.” And as I afterwards learned, in so
saying, he spoke no more than what was true; for he had been once
settled in a very good situation in Glamorganshire, and was ruined by
being security for an acquaintance. All differences being composed, he
untied his bundle, which consisted of three bunches of onions, and a
great lump of Cheshire cheese, wrapped up in a handkerchief: and,
taking some biscuit from the cupboard, fell to with a keen appetite,
inviting us to share of the repast. When he had fed heartily on his
homely fare, he filled a large cup, made of a cocoa-nut shell, with
brandy, and, drinking it off, told us, “Prandy was the best menstruum
for onions and sheese.” His hunger being appeased, he began to be in
better humour; and, being inquisitive about my birth, no sooner
understood that I was descended of a good family, than he discovered a
particular good-will to me on that account, deducing his own pedigree
in a direct line from the famous Caractacus, king of the Britons, who
was first the prisoner, and afterwards the friend of Claudius Caesar.
Perceiving how much I was reduced in point of linen, he made me a
present of two good ruffled shirts, which, with two more of check which
I received from Mr. Thompson, enabled me to appear with decency.

Meanwhile the sailor, whom Mr. Morgan had sent to the doctor, brought a
prescription for his messmate, which when the Welshman had read, he got
up to prepare it, and asked, “if the man was dead or alive.” “Dead!”
replied Jack; “if he was dead, he would have no occasion for doctor’s
stuff. No, thank God, death han’t as yet boarded him. But they have
been yard-arm and yard-arm these three glasses.” “Are his eyes open,”
continued the mate. “His starboard eye,” said the sailor, “is open, but
fast jammed in his head: and the haulyards of his under jaw have given
way.” “Passion of my heart!” cried Morgan, “the man is as pad as one
would desire to be! Did you feel his pulses!” To this the other replied
with “Anan!” Upon which this Cambro Briton, with great earnestness and
humanity, ordered the tar to run to his messmate, and keep him alive
till he should come with the medicine, “and then,” said he, “you shall
peradventure pehold what you shall see.”

The poor fellow, with great simplicity, ran to the place where the sick
man lay, but in less than a minute returned with a woful countenance,
and told us his comrade had struck. Morgan, hearing this, exclaimed,
“Mercy upon my salvation! why did you not stop him till I came?” “Stop
him!” said the other; “I hailed him several times, but he was too far
on his way, and the enemy had got possession of his close quarters; so
that he did not mind me.” “Well, well,” said he, “we all owe heaven a
teath. Go your ways, you ragamuffin, and take an example and a warning,
look you, and repent of your misteets.” So saying, he pushed the seaman
out of the berth.

While we entertained us with reflections suitable to this event, we
heard the boatswain pipe to dinner; and immediately the boy belonging
to our mess ran to the locker, from whence he carried off a large
wooden platter, and, in a few minutes, returned with it full of boiled
peas, crying “Scaldings” all the way as he came. The cloth, consisting
of a piece of an old sail, was instantly laid, covered with three
plates, which by the colour I could with difficulty discern to be
metal, and as many spoons of the same composition, two of which were
curtailed in the handles, and the other abridged in the lip. Mr. Morgan
himself enriched this mess with a lump of salt butter scooped from an
old gallipot, and a handful of onions shorn, with some pounded pepper.
I was not very much tempted with the appearance of this dish, of which,
nevertheless, my messmates ate heartily, advising me to follow their
example, as it was banyan day and we could have no meat till next noon.
But I had already laid in sufficient for the occasion, and therefore
desired to be excused: expressing a curiosity to know the meaning of
banyan day. They told me, that, on Mondays, Wednesdays, and Fridays,
the ship’s company had no allowance of meat, and that these meagre days
were called banyan days, the reason of which they did not know; but I
have since learned they take their denomination from a sect of devotees
in some parts of the East Indies, who never taste flesh.

After dinner Thompson led me round the ship, showed me the different
parts, described their uses, and, as far as he could, made me
acquainted with the particulars of the discipline and economy practised
on board. He then demanded of the boatswain a hammock for me, which was
slung in a very neat manner by my friend Jack Rattlin; and, as I had no
bed-clothes, procured credit for me with the purser, for a mattress and
two blankets. At seven o’clock in the evening Morgan visited the sick,
and, having ordered what was proper for each, I assisted Thompson in
making up his prescriptions: but when I followed him with the medicines
into the sick berth, or hospital, and observed the situation of the
patients, I was much less surprised that people should die on board,
than that a sick person should recover. Here I saw about fifty
miserable distempered wretches, suspended in rows, so huddled one upon
another, that not more than fourteen inches space was allotted for each
with his bed and bedding; and deprived of the light of the day, as well
as of fresh air; breathing nothing but a noisome atmosphere of the
morbid steams exhaling from their own excrements and diseased bodies,
devoured with vermin hatched in the filth that surrounded them, and
destitute of every convenience necessary for people in that helpless
condition.




CHAPTER XXVI


A disagreeable accident happens to me in the discharge of my
office—Morgan’s nose is offended—a dialogue between him and the Ship’s
steward—upon examination, I find more causes of complaint than one—my
hair is cut off—Morgan’s cookery—the manner of sleeping on board—I am
waked in the night by a dreadful noise


Could not comprehend how it was possible for the attendants to come
near those who hung on the inside towards the sides of the ship, in
order to assist them, as they seemed barricadoed by those who lay on
the outside, and entirely out of the reach of all visitation; much less
could I conceive how my friend Thompson would be able to administer
clysters, that were ordered for some, in that situation; when I saw him
thrust his wig in his pocket, and strip himself to his waistcoat in a
moment, then creep on all fours under the hammocks of the sick, and,
forcing up his bare pate between two, keep them asunder with one
shoulder, until he had done his duty. Eager to learn the service, I
desired he would give me leave to perform the next operation of that
kind; and he consenting, I undressed myself after his example, and
crawling along, the ship happened to roll: this motion alarming me, I
laid hold of the first thing that came within my grasp with such
violence, that I overturned it, and soon found, by the smell that
issued upon me, that I had unlocked a box of the most delicious
perfume. It was well for me that my nose was none of the most delicate,
else I know not how I might have been affected by this vapour, which
diffused itself all over the ship, to the utter discomposure of
everybody who tarried on the same dock! neither was the consequence of
this disgrace confined to my sense of smelling only; for I felt my
misfortune more ways than one. That I might not, however, appear
altogether disconcerted in this my first essay, I got up, and, pushing
my head with great force between two hammocks, towards the middle,
where the greatest resistance was, I made an opening indeed, but, not
understanding the knack of dexterously turning my shoulder to maintain
my advantage, had the mortification to find myself stuck up, as it
were, in a pillory, and the weight of three or four people bearing on
each side of my neck, so that I was in danger of strangulation. While I
remained in this defenceless posture, one of the sick men, rendered
peevish by his distemper, was so enraged at the smell I had occasioned
and the rude shock he had received from me in my elevation, that, with
many bitter reproaches, he seized me by the nose, which he tweaked so
unmercifully, that I roared with anguish. Thompson, perceiving my
condition, ordered one of the waiters to my assistance, who, with much
difficulty, disengaged me from this situation, and hindered me from
taking vengeance on the sick man, whose indisposition would not have
screened him from the effects of my indignation.

After having made an end of our ministry for that time, we descended to
the cockpit, my friend comforting me for what had happened with a
homely proverb, which I do not choose to repeat. When we had descended
half-way down the ladder, Mr. Morgan, before he saw us, having
intelligence by his nose of the approach of something extraordinary,
cried, “Cot have mercy upon my senses! I pelieve the enemy has poarded
us in a stinkpot!” Then, directing his discourse to the steward, from
whence he imagined the odour proceeded, he reprimanded him severely for
the freedoms he took among gentlemen of birth, and threatened to smoke
him like a padger with sulphur, if ever he should presume to offend his
neighbours with such smells for the future. The steward, conscious of
his own innocence, replied with some warmth, “I know of no smells but
those of your own making.” This repartee introduced a smart dialogue,
in which the Welshman undertook to prove, that, though the stench he
complained of did not flow from the steward’s own body, he was
nevertheless the author of it, by serving out damaged provisions to the
ship’s company; and, in particular, putrified cheese, from the use of
which only, he affirmed, such unsavoury steams could arise. Then he
launched out into the praise of good cheese, of which he gave the
analysis; explained the different kinds of that commodity, with the
methods practised to make and preserve it, concluded in observing,
that, in yielding good cheese, the county of Glamorgan might vie with
Cheshire itself, and was much superior to it in the produce of goats
and putter.

I gathered from this conversation, that, if I entered in my present
pickle, I should be no welcome guest, and therefore desired Mr.
Thompson to go before, and represent my calamity; at which the first
mate, expressing some concern, went upon deck immediately, taking his
way through the cable-tier and the main hatchway, to avoid encountering
me; desiring me to clean myself as soon as possible: for he intended to
regale himself with a dish of salmagundy and a pipe. Accordingly, I set
about this disagreeable business, and soon found I had more causes of
complaint than I at first imagined; for I perceived some guests had
honoured me with their company, whose visit I did not think seasonable:
neither did they seem inclined to leave me in a hurry, for they were in
possession of my chief quarters, where they fed without reserve at the
expense of my blood. But, considering it would be easier to extirpate
the ferocious colony in the infancy of their settlement, than after
they should be multiplied and naturalised to the soil, I took the
advice of my friend, who, to prevent such misfortunes, went always
close shaved, and made the boy of our mess cut off my hair, which had
been growing since I left the service of Lavement; and the second mate
lent me an old bobwig to supply the loss of that covering. This affair
being ended, and everything adjusted in the best manner my
circumstances would permit, the descendant of Caractacus returned, and,
ordering the boy to bring a piece of salt beef from the brine, cut off
a slice, and mixed it with an equal quantity of onions, which seasoning
with a moderate proportion of pepper and salt, he brought it to a
consistence with oil and vinegar; then, tasting the dish, assured us it
was the best salmagundy that ever he made, and recommended it to our
palate with such heartiness that I could not help doing honour to his
preparation. But I had no sooner swallowed a mouthful, than I thought
my entrails were scorched, and endeavoured with a deluge of small-beer
to allay the heat it occasioned. Supper being over, Mr. Morgan having
smoked a couple of pipes, and supplied the moisture he had expended
with as many cans of flip, of which we all partook, a certain yawning
began to admonish me that it was high time to repair by sleep the
injury I had suffered from want of rest the preceding night; which
being perceived by my companions, whose time of repose was now arrived,
they proposed we should turn in, or in other words, go to bed. Our
hammocks, which hung parallel to one another, on the outside of the
berth, were immediately unlashed, and I beheld my messmates spring with
great agility into their respective nests, where they seemed to lie
concealed, very much at their ease. But it was some time before I could
prevail upon myself to trust my carcase at such a distance from the
ground, in a narrow bag, out of which, I imagined, I should be apt, on
the least motion in my sleep, to tumble down at the hazard of breaking
my bones. I suffered myself, however, to be persuaded, and taking a
leap to get in, threw myself quite over, with such violence, that had I
not luckily got hold of Thompson’s hammock, I should have pitched upon
my head on the other side, and in all likelihood fractured my skull.

After some fruitless efforts, I succeeded at last; but the apprehension
of the jeopardy in which I believed myself withstood all the attacks of
sleep till towards the morning watch, when, in spite of my fears, I was
overpowered with slumber, though I did not long enjoy this comfortable
situation, being aroused with a noise so loud and shrill, that I
thought the drums of my ears were burst by it; this was followed by a
dreadful summons pronounced by a hoarse voice, which I could not
understand. While I was debating with myself, whether or not I should
wake my companion and inquire into the occasion of this disturbance, I
was informed by one of the quartermasters who passed by me with a
lantern in his hand, that the noise which alarmed me was occasioned by
the boatswain’s mates who called up the larboard watch, and that I must
lay my account with such an interruption every morning at the same
hour. Being now more assured of my safety, I undressed myself again to
rest, and slept till eight o’clock, when rising, and breakfasting with
my comrades on biscuit and brandy, the sick were visited and assisted
as before; after which visitation my good friend Thompson explained and
performed another piece of duty, to which I was a stranger. At a
certain hour in the morning, the boy of the mess went round all the
decks, ringing a small hand-bell, and, in rhymes composed for the
occasion, invited all those who had sores to repair before the mast,
where one of the doctor’s mates attended, with applications to dress
them.




CHAPTER XXVII


I acquire the friendship of the Surgeon, who procures a warrant for me,
and makes me a present of clothes—a battle between a Midshipman and
me—the Surgeon leaves the ship—the Captain comes on board with another
Surgeon—a dialogue between the Captain and Morgan—the sick are ordered
to be brought upon the Quarter-deck and examined—the consequences of
that order—a Madman accuses Morgan, and is set at liberty by command of
the Captain, whom he instantly attacks, and pummels without mercy


While I was busied with my friend in the practice. The doctor chanced
to pass by the place where we were, and stopping to observe me appeared
very well satisfied with my application; and afterwards sent for me to
his cabin, where, having examined me touching my skill in surgery, and
the particulars of my fortune, he interested himself so far in my
behalf, as to promise his assistance in procuring a warrant for me,
seeing I had already been found qualified at Surgeons’ Hall for the
station I filled on board; and in this good office he the more
cordially engaged when he understood I was nephew to lieutenant
Bowling, for whom he expressed a particular regard. In the meantime, I
could learn from his discourse that he did not intend to go to sea
again with Captain Oakum, having, as he thought, been indifferently
used by him during the last voyage.

While I lived tolerably easy, in expectation of preferment, I was not
altogether without mortifications, which I not only suffered from the
rude insults of the sailors and petty officers, among whom I was known
by the name of Loblolly Boy, but also from the disposition of Morgan,
who, though friendly in the main, was often very troublesome with his
pride, which expected a good deal of submission from me, and delighted
in recapitulating the favours I had received at his hands.

About six weeks after my arrival on board, the surgeon, bidding me to
follow him into his cabin, presented a warrant to me, by which I was
appointed surgeon’s third mate on board the Thunder. This he had
procured by his interest at the Navy Office; as also another for
himself, by virtue of which he was removed into a second-rate. I
acknowledged his kindness in the strongest terms my gratitude could
suggest, and professed my sorrow at the prospect of losing so valuable
a friend, to whom I hoped to have recommended myself still further, by
my respectful and diligent behaviour. But his generosity rested not
here; for before he left the ship he made me a present of a chest and
some clothes that enabled me to support the rank to which he had raised
me.

I found my spirit revive with my good fortune; and, now I was an
officer, resolved to maintain the dignity of my station, against all
opposition or affronts; nor was it long before I had occasion to exert
my resolution. My old enemy, the midshipman (whose name was Crampley),
entertaining an implacable animosity against me for the disgrace he had
suffered on my account, had since that time taken all opportunities of
reviling and ridiculing me, when I was not entitled to retort this bad
usage; and, even after I had been rated on the books, and mustered as
surgeon’s mate, did not think fit to restrain his insolence. In
particular, being one day present while I dressed a wound in a sailor’s
leg, he began to sing a song, which I thought highly injurious to the
honour of my country, and therefore signified my resentment, by
observing that the Scots always laid their account with finding enemies
among the ignorant, insignificant, and malicious. This unexpected piece
of assurance enraged him to such a degree, that he lent me a blow on
the face, which I verily thought had demolished my cheek-bone. I was
not slow in returning the obligation, and the affair began to be very
serious, when by accident Mr. Morgan, and one of the master’s mates,
coming that way, interposed, and, inquiring into the cause, endeavoured
to promote a reconciliation; but, finding us both exasperated to the
uttermost, and bent against accommodation, they advised us either to
leave our difference undecided, till we should have an opportunity of
terminating it on shore, like gentlemen, or else choose a proper place
on board, and bring it to an issue by boxing. The last expedient was
greedily embraced by us both; and, being forthwith conducted to the
ground proposed, we stripped in a moment, and began a furious contest,
in which I soon found myself inferior to my antagonist, not so much in
strength and agility, as in skill, which he had acquired in the school
of Hockley-in-the-Hole at Tottenham-court. Many cross buttocks did I
sustain, and pegs on the stomach without number, till at last my breath
being quite gone, as well as my vigour wasted, I grew desperate, and
collecting all my strength in one effort, threw in at once, head,
hands, and feet, with such violence, that I drove my antagonist three
paces backward into the main hatchway, down which he fell, and pitching
upon his head and right shoulder, remained without sense and motion.
Morgan, looking down, and seeing him lie in that condition, cried,
“Upon my conscience, as I am a Christian sinner, (look you,) I believe
his pattles are all ofer; but I take you all to witness that there was
no treachery in the case, and that he has suffered by the chance of
war.” So saying he descended to the deck below, to examine into the
situation of my adversary, and left me very little pleased with my
victory, as I found myself not only terribly bruised, but likewise in
danger of being called to account for the death of Crampley; but this
fear vanished when my fellow-mate having, by bleeding him in the
jugular, brought him to himself, and inquired into the state of his
body, called up to me to be under no concern, for the midshipman had
received no other damage than as pretty a luxation of the os humeri as
one would desire to see on a summer’s day. Upon this information I
crawled down to the cock-pit, and acquainted Thompson with the affair,
who, providing himself with bandages, etc, necessary for the occasion,
went up to assist Mr. Morgan in the reduction of the dislocation. When
this was successfully performed, they wished me joy of the event of the
combat; and the Welshman, after observing, that, in all likelihood, the
ancient Scots and Britons were the same people, bade me “praise Cot for
putting mettle in my pelly, and strength in my limbs to support it.” I
acquired such reputation by this rencontre, which lasted twenty
minutes, that everybody became more cautious in behaviour towards me;
though Crampley, with his arm in a sling, talked very high, and
threatened to seize the first opportunity of retrieving on shore the
honour he had lost by an accident, from which I could justly claim no
merit.

About this time, Captain Oakum, having received sailing orders, came on
board, and brought along with him a surgeon of his own country, who
soon made us sensible of the loss we suffered in the departure of
Doctor Atkins; for he was grossly ignorant, and intolerably assuming,
false, vindictive, and unforgiving; a merciless tyrant to his
inferiors, an abject sycophant to those above him. In the morning after
the captain came on board, our first mate, according to custom, went to
wait on him with a sick list, which, when this grim commander had
perused, he cried with a stern countenance, “Blood and cons! sixty-one
sick people on board of my ship! Harkee, you sir, I’ll have no sick in
my ship, by G—d.” The Welshman replied, “he should be very glad to find
no sick people on board: but, while it was otherwise, he did no more
than his duty in presenting him with a list.” “You and your list may be
d—n’d,” said the captain, throwing it at him; “I say, there shall be no
sick in this ship while I have the command of her.” Mr. Morgan, being
nettled at this treatment, told him his indignation ought to be
directed to Cot Almighty, who visited his people with distempers, and
not to him, who contributed all in his power towards their cure. The
bashaw, not being used to such behaviour in any of his officers, was
enraged to fury at this satirical insinuation, and, stamping with his
foot, called him insolent scoundrel, threatening to have him pinioned
to the deck, if he should presume to utter another syllable. But the
blood of Caractacus being thoroughly heated, disdained to be restricted
by such a command, and began to manifest itself in, “Captain Oakum, I
am a shentleman of birth and parentage (look you), and peradventure I
am moreover.” Here his harangue was broken off by the captain’s
steward, who, being Morgan’s countryman, hurried him out of the cabin
before he had time to exasperate his master to a greater degree, and
this would certainly have been the case; for the indignant Welshman
could hardly be hindered by his friend’s arguments and entreaties from
re-entering the presence-chamber, and defying Captain Oakum to his
teeth. He was, however appeased at length, and came down to the berth,
where, finding Thompson and me at work preparing medicines, he bade us
leave off our lapour to go to play, for the captain, by his sole word,
and power, and command, had driven sickness a pegging to the tevil, and
there was no more malady on board. So saying, he drank off a gill of
brandy sighed grievously three times, poured fort an ejaculation of
“Cot pless my heart, liver, and lungs!” and then began to sing a Welsh
song with great earnestness of visage, voice, and gesture. I could not
conceive the meaning of this singular phenomenon, and saw by the looks
of Thompson, who at the same time shook his head, that he suspected
poor Cadwallader’s brains were unsettled. He, perceiving our amazement,
told us he would explain the mystery; but at the same time bade us take
notice, that he had lived poy, patchelor, married man, and widower,
almost forty years, and in all that time there was no man, nor mother’s
son in the whole world who durst use him so ill as Captain Oakum had
done. Then he acquainted us with the dialogue that passed between them,
as I have already related it: and had no sooner finished this narration
than he received a message from the surgeon, to bring the sick-list to
the quarter-deck, for the captain had ordered all the patients thither
to be reviewed.

This inhuman order shocked us extremely, as we knew it would be
impossible to carry some of them on the deck, without imminent danger
of their lives: but, as we likewise knew it would be to no purpose for
us to remonstrate against it, we repaired to the quarter-deck in a
body, to see this extraordinary muster; Morgan observing by the way,
that the captain was going to send to the other world a great many
evidences to testify against himself. When we appeared upon deck, the
captain bade the doctor, who stood bowing at his right hand, look at
these lazy lubberly sons of bitches, who were good for nothing on board
but to eat the king’s provision, and encourage idleness in the
skulkers. The surgeon grinned approbation, and, taking the list, began
to examine the complaints of each as they could crawl to the place
appointed. The first who came under his cognizance was a poor fellow
just freed of a fever, which had weakened him so much that he could
hardly stand. Mr. Mackshane (for that was the doctor’s name), having
felt his pulse, protested he was as well as any man in the world; and
the captain delivered him over to the boatswain’s mate, with orders
that he should receive a round dozen at the gangway immediately, for
counterfeiting himself sick; but, before the discipline could be
executed, the man dropped down on the deck, and had well nigh perished
under the hands of the executioner. The next patient to be considered,
laboured under a quartan ague, and, being then in his interval of
health, discovered no other symptoms of distemper than a pale meagre
countenance and emaciated body; upon which he was declared fit for
duty, and turned over to the boatswain; but, being resolved to disgrace
the doctor, died upon the forecastle next day, during his cold fit. The
third complained of a pleuritic stitch, and spitting of blood, for
which Doctor Mackshane prescribed exercise at the pump to promote
expectoration! but whether this was improper for one in his situation,
or that it was used to excess, I know not, but in less than
half-an-hour he was suffocated with a deluge of blood that issued from
his lungs. A fourth, with much difficulty, climbed to the quarter-deck,
being loaded with a monstrous ascites, or dropsy, that invaded his
chest so much, he could scarce fetch his breath; but his disease being
interpreted into fat, occasioned by idleness and excess of eating, he
was ordered, with a view to promote perspiration and enlarge his chest,
to go aloft immediately. It was in vain for this unwieldy wretch to
allege his utter incapacity; the boatswain’s driver was commanded to
whip him up with the cat-and-nine-tails; the smart of this application
made him exert himself so much, that he actually arrived at the puttock
shrouds; but when the enormous weight of his body had nothing else to
support than his weakened arms, either out of spite or necessity, he
quitted his hold, and plunged into the sea, where he must have been
drowned, had not a sailor, who was in a boat alongside, saved his life,
by keeping him afloat till he was hoisted on board by a tackle.

It would be tedious and disagreeable to describe the fate of every
miserable object that suffered by the inhumanity and ignorance of the
captain and surgeon, who so wantonly sacrificed the lives of their
fellow-creatures. Many were brought up in the height of fevers, and
rendered delirious by the injuries they received in the way. Some gave
up the ghost in the presence of their inspectors; and others, who were
ordered to their duties, languished a few days at work among their
fellows, and then departed without any ceremony. On the whole, the
number of the sick was reduced to less than a dozen; and the authors of
this reduction were applauding themselves for the services they had
done to their king and country, when the boatswain’s mate informed his
honour, that there was a man below lashed to his hammock, by direction
of the doctor’s mate, and that he begged hard to be released;
affirming, he had been so maltreated only for a grudge Mr. Morgan bore
him, and that he was as much in his senses as any man aboard. The
captain hearing this, darted a severe look at the Welshman, and ordered
the man to be brought up immediately; upon which, Morgan protested with
great fervency, that the person in question was as mad as a March hare;
and begged for the love of Cot, they would at least keep his arms
pinioned during his examination, to prevent him from doing mischief.
This request the commander granted for his own sake, and the patient
was produced, who insisted upon his being in his right wits with such
calmness and strength of argument, that everybody present was inclined
to believe him, except Morgan, who affirmed there was no trusting to
appearances; for he himself had been so much imposed upon by his
behaviour two days before, that he had actually unbound him with his
own hands, and had well nigh been murdered for his pains: this was
confirmed by the evidence of one of the waiters, who declared he had
pulled this patient from the doctor’s mate, whom he had gotten down,
and almost strangled. To this the man answered, that the witness was a
creature of Morgan’s, and suborned to give his testimony against him by
the malice of the mate, whom the defendant had affronted, by
discovering to the people on board, that Mr. Morgan’s wife kept a
gin-shop in Ragfair. This anecdote produced a laugh at the expense of
the Welshman, who, shaking his head with some emotion, said, “Ay, ay,
’tis no matter. Cot knows, it is an arrant falsehood.” Captain Oakum,
without any farther hesitation, ordered the fellow to be unfettered; at
the same time, threatening to make Morgan exchange situations with him
for his spite; but the Briton no sooner heard the decision in favour of
the madman, than he got up to the mizen-shrouds, crying to Thompson and
me to get out of his reach, for we should see him play the devil with a
vengeance. We did not think fit to disregard his caution, and
accordingly got up on the poop, whence we beheld the maniac (as soon as
he was released) fly at the captain like a fury, crying, “I’ll let you
know, you scoundrel, that I am commander of this vessel,” and pummel
him without mercy. The surgeon, who went to the assistance of his
patron, shared the same fate; and it was with the utmost difficulty
that he was mastered at last, after having done great execution among
those who opposed him.




CHAPTER XXVIII


The Captain enraged, threatens to put the Madman to death with his own
hand—is diverted from that resolution by the arguments and persuasion
of the first Lieutenant and Surgeon—we set sail for St. Helen’s, join
the fleet under the command of Sir C— O—gle, and proceed for the West
Indies—are overtaken by a terrible tempest—my friend Jack Rattlin has
his leg broke by a fall from the mainyard—the behaviour of Mr.
Mackshane—Jack opposes the amputation of his limb, in which he is
seconded by Morgan and me, we undertake the cure and perform it
successfully


The captain was carried into his cabin, so enraged with the treatment
he had received, that he ordered the fellow to be brought before him,
that he might have the pleasure of pistoling him with his own hand; and
would certainly have satisfied his revenge in this manner, had not the
first lieutenant remonstrated against it, by observing that, in all
appearances, the fellow was not mad, but desperate; that he had been
hired by some enemy of the captain’s to him, and therefore ought to be
kept in irons till he could be brought to a court-martial, which, no
doubt, would sift the affair to the bottom (by which means important
discoveries might be made), and then sentence the criminal to a death
according to his demerits. This suggestion, improbable as it was, had
the desired effect upon the captain, being exactly calculated for the
meridan of his intellects; more especially as Dr. Mackshane espoused
this opinion, in consequence of his previous declaration that the man
was not mad. Morgan finding there was no more damage done, could not
help discovering by his countenance the pleasure he enjoyed on this
occasion; and, while he bathed the doctor’s face with an embrocation,
ventured to ask him, whether he thought there were more fools or madmen
on board? But he would have been wiser in containing this sally, which
his patient carefully laid up in his memory, to be taken notice of at a
more fit season. Meanwhile we weighed anchor, and, on our way to the
Downs, the madman, who was treated as a prisoner, took an opportunity,
while the sentinel attending him was at the head, to leap and frustrate
the revenge of the captain. We stayed not long at the Downs, but took
the benefit of the first easterly wind to go round to Spithead: where,
having received provisions on board for six months, we sailed from St.
Helen’s in the grand fleet bound for the West Indies, on the
ever-memorable expedition of Carthagena.

It was not without great mortification I saw myself on the point of
being transported to such a distant and unhealthy climate, destitute of
every convenience that could render such a voyage supportable, and
under the dominion of an arbitrary tyrant, whose command was almost
intolerable; however, as these complaints were common to a great many
on board, I resolved to submit patiently to my fate, and contrive to
make myself as easy as the nature of the case would allow. We got out
of the channel with a prosperous breeze, which died away, leaving us
becalmed about fifty leagues to the westward of the Lizard: but this
state of inaction did not last long; for next night our maintop-sail
was split by the wind, which, in the morning, increased to a hurricane.
I was awakened by a most horrible din, occasioned by the play of the
gun carriages upon the decks above, the cracking of cabins, the howling
of the wind through the shrouds, the confused noise of the ship’s crew,
the pipes of the boatswain and his mates, the trumpets of the
lieutenants, and the clanking of the chain pumps. Morgan who had never
been at sea before, turned out in a great hurry, crying, “Cot have
mercy and compassion upon us! I believe, we have cot upon the confines
of Lucifer and the d—n’d!” while poor Thompson lay quaking in his
hammock, putting up petitions to heaven for our safety. I rose and
joined the Welshman, with whom (after having fortified ourselves with
brandy) I went above; but if my sense of hearing was startled before,
how must my sight have been apalled in beholding the effects of the
storm! The sea was swelled into billows mountain-high, on the top of
which our ship sometimes hung as if it were about to be precipitated to
the abyss below! Sometimes we sank between two waves that rose on each
side higher than our topmast-head, and threatened by dashing together
to overwhelm us in a moment! Of all our fleet, consisting of a hundred
and fifty sail, scarce twelve appeared, and these driving under their
bare poles, at the mercy of the tempest. At length the mast of one of
them gave way, and tumbled overboard with a hideous crash! Nor was the
prospect in our own ship much more agreeable; a number of officers and
sailors ran backward and forward with distraction in their looks,
halloaing to one another, and undetermined what they should attend to
first. Some clung to the yards, endeavouring to unbend the sails that
were split into a thousand pieces flapping in the wind; others tried to
furl those which were yet whole, while the masts, at every pitch, bent
and quivered like twigs, as if they would have shivered into
innumerable splinters! While I considered this scene with equal terror
and astonishment, one of the main braces broke, by the shock whereof
two sailors were flung from the yard’s arm into the sea, where they
perished, and poor Jack Rattlin thrown down upon the deck, at the
expense of a broken leg. Morgan and I ran immediately to his
assistance, and found a splinter of the shin-bone thrust by the
violence of the fall through the skin; as this was a case of too great
consequence to be treated without the authority of the doctor I went
down to his cabin to inform him of the accident, as well as to bring up
dressings which we always kept ready prepared. I entered his apartment
without any ceremony, and, by the glimmering of a lamp, perceived him
on his knees before something that very much resembled a crucifix; but
this I will not insist upon, that I may not seem too much a slave to
common report, which indeed assisted my conjecture on this occasion, by
representing Dr. Mackshane as a member of the church of Rome. Be this
as it will, he got up in a sort of confusion, occasioned (I suppose) by
his being disturbed in his devotion, and in a trice snatched the
subject of my suspicion from my sight.

After making an apology for my intrusion, I acquainted him with the
situation of Rattlin, but could by no means prevail upon him to visit
him on deck, where he lay; he bade me desire the boatswain to order
some of the men to carry him down to the cockpit, “and in the
meantime,” said he, “I will direct Thompson to get ready the
dressings.” When I signified to the boatswain the doctor’s desire, he
swore a terrible oath, that he could not spare one man from deck,
because he expected the mast would go by the board every minute. This
piece of information did not at all contribute to my peace of mind;
however, as my friend Rattlin complained very much, with the assistance
of Morgan I supported him to the lower deck, whither Mr. Mackshane,
after much entreaty, ventured to come, attended by Thompson, with a box
full of dressings, and his own servant, who carried a whole set of
capital instruments. He examined the fracture and the wound, and
concluding, from a livid colour extending itself upon the limb, that
mortification would ensue, resolved to amputate the leg immediately.
This was a dreadful sentence to the patient, who, recruiting himself
with a quid of tobacco, pronounced with a woful countenance, “What! is
there no remedy, doctor! must I be dock’d? can’t you splice it?”
“Assuredly, Doctor Mackshane,” said the first mate, “with submission,
and deference, and veneration, to your superior apilities, and
opportunities, and stations, look you, I do apprehend, and conjure, and
aver, that there is no occasion nor necessity to smite off this poor
man’s leg.” “God Almighty bless you, dear Welshman!” cried Rattlin,
“may you have fair wind and weather wheresoever you’re bound, and come
to an anchor in the road of heaven at last!” Mackshane, very much
incensed at his mate’s differing in opinion from him, so openly,
answered, that he was not bound to give an account of his practice to
him; and in a peremptory tone, ordered him to apply the tourniquet. At
the sight of which, Jack, starting up, cried, “Avast, avast! D—n my
heart, if you clap your nippers on me, till I know wherefore! Mr.
Random, won’t you lend a hand towards saving my precious limb! Odd’s
heart, if Lieutenant Bowling was here, he would not suffer Jack
Rattlin’s leg to be chopped off like a piece of old junk.”

This pathetic address to me, joined to my inclination to serve my
honest friend, and the reasons I had to believe there was no danger in
delaying the amputation, induced me to declare myself of the first
mate’s opinion, and affirm that the preternatural colour of the skin
was owing to an inflammation, occasioned by a contusion, and common in
all such cases, without any indication of an approaching gangrene.
Morgan, who had a great opinion of my skill, manifestly exulted in my
fellowship, and asked Thompson’s sentiments in the matter, in hopes of
strengthening our association with him too; but he, being of a meek
disposition, and either dreading the enmity of the surgeon, or speaking
the dictates of his own judgment, in a modest manner espoused the
opinion of Mackshane, who by this time having consulted with himself,
determined to act in such a manner as to screen himself from censure,
and at the same time revenge himself on us, for our arrogance in
contradicting him. With this view, he asked if we would undertake to
cure the leg at our peril: that is, be answerable for the consequence.
To this question, Morgan replied, that the lives of his creatures are
at the hands of Cot alone; and it would be great presumption in him to
undertake for an event that was in the power of his Maker, no more than
the doctor could promise to cure all the sick to whom he administered
his assistance; but if the patient would put himself under our
direction, we would do our endeavour to bring his distemper to a
favourable issue, to which at present we saw no obstruction.

I signified my concurrence; and Rattlin was so overjoyed that, shaking
us both by the hands, he swore nobody else should touch him, and, if he
died, his blood should be upon his own head. Mr. Mackshane, flattering
himself with the prospect of our miscarriage, went away, and left us to
manage it as we should think proper; accordingly, having sawed off part
of the splinter that stuck through the skin, we reduced the fracture,
dressed the wound, applied the eighteen-tailed bandage, and put the leg
in a box, secundam artem. Everything succeeded according to our wish,
and we had the satisfaction of not only preserving the poor fellow’s
leg, but likewise of rendering the doctor contemptible among the ship’s
company, who had all their eyes on us during the course of this cure,
which was completed in six weeks.




CHAPTER XXIX


Mackshane’s malice—I am taken up and imprisoned for a spy—Morgan meets
with the same fate—Thompson is tampered with to turn evidence against
us—disdains the proposal, and is maltreated for his integrity—Morgan is
released to assist the Surgeon during an engagement with some French
ships-of-war—I remain fettered on the poop, exposed to the enemy’s
shot, and grow delirious with fear—am comforted after the battle by
Morgan, who speaks freely of the captain, is overheard by the sentinel,
who informs against him, and again imprisoned—Thompson grows desperate,
and, notwithstanding the remonstrances of Morgan and me, goes overboard
in the night


In the meantime the storm subsided into a brisk gale, that carried us
into the warm latitudes, where the weather became intolerable, and the
crew very sickly. The doctor left nothing unattempted towards the
completion of his vengeance against the Welshman and me. He went among
the sick under pretence of inquiring into their grievances, with a view
of picking up complaints to our prejudice; but, finding himself
frustrated in that expectation by the goodwill we had procured from the
patients by our diligence and humanity, he took the resolution of
listening to our conversation, by hiding himself behind the canvas that
surrounded our berth; here too he was detected by the boy of our mess,
who acquainted us with this piece of behaviour, and one night, while we
were picking a large bone of salt beef, Morgan discerned something stir
on the outside of our hangings, which immediately interpreting to be
the doctor, he tipped me the wink, and pointed to the place, where I
could perceive somebody standing; upon which, I snatched up the bone,
and levelled it with all my force at him, saying, “Whoever you are,
take that for your curiosity.” It had the desired effect, for we heard
the listener tumble down, and afterwards crawl to his own cabin. I
applauded myself much for this feat, which turned out one of the most
unlucky exploits of my life, Mackshane, from that time, marking me out
for destruction.

About a week after this exploit, as I was going my rounds among the
sick, I was taken prisoner, and carried to the poop by the
master-at-arms, where I was loaded with irons, and stapled to the deck,
on pretence that I was a spy on board, and had conspired against the
captain’s life. How ridiculous soever this imputation was, I did not
fail to suffer by it all the rigour that could be shown to the worst of
criminals, being exposed in this miserable condition to the scorching
heat of the sun by day, and the unwholesome damps by night, during the
space of twelve days, in which I was neither brought to trial, nor
examined touching the probability of the charge. I had no sooner
recovered the use of my reflection, which had been quite overthrown by
this accident, than I sent for Thompson, who, after condoling me on the
occasion, hinted, that I owed this misfortune to the hatred of the
doctor, who had given an information against me to the captain, in
consequence of which I was arrested, and all my papers seized. While I
was cursing my capricious fate, I saw Morgan ascend the poop, guarded
by two corporals, who made him sit down by me, that he might be
pinioned in the same machine. Notwithstanding my situation, I could
scarce refrain from laughing at the countenance of my fellow prisoner,
who, without speaking one word, allowed his feet to be inclosed in the
rings provided for that purpose; but, when they pretended to fasten him
on his back he grew outrageous, and drawing a large couteau from his
side-pocket, threatened to rip up the belly of the first man that
should approach him, in order to treat him in such an unworthy manner.
They were prepared to use him very roughly, when the lieutenant on the
quarter-deck called up to them to let him remain as he was. He then
crept towards me, and, taking me by the hand, bade me “put my trust in
Cot.” And looking at Thompson, who sat by us trembling, with a pale
visage; told him there were two more rings for his feet, and he should
be glad to find him in such good company. But it was not the intention
of our adversary to include the second mate in our fate: him he
expected to be his drudge in attending the sick and, if possible, his
evidence against us: with this view he sounded him afar off, but,
finding his integrity incorruptible, harrassed him so much out of
spite, that in a short time this mild creature grew weary of his life.

While I and my fellow prisoner comforted each other in our tribulation,
the admiral discovered four sail to leeward and made signal for our
ship and four more to chase: hereupon everything was cleared for an
engagement, and Mackshane, foreseeing he should have occasion for more
assistants than one obtained Morgan’s liberty, while I was let in this
deplorable posture to the chance of battle. It was almost dark when we
came up with the sternmost chase, which we hailed, and inquired who
they were. They gave us to understand they were French men-of-war, upon
which Captain Oakum commanded them to send their boat on board of him!
but they refused, telling him, if he had any business with them, to
come on board of their ship: he then threatened to pour in a broadside
upon them, which they promised to retain. Both sides were as good as
their word, and the engagement began with great fury. The reader may
guess how I passed my time, lying in this helpless situation, amidst
the terrors of a sea-fight; expecting every moment to be cut asunder,
or dashed in pieces by the enemy’s shot! I endeavoured to compose
myself as much as possible, by reflecting that I was not a whit more
exposed than those who were stationed about me; but, when I beheld them
employed without intermission in annoying the foe, and encouraged by
the society and behaviour of one another, I could easily perceive a
wide difference between their condition and mine: however, I concealed
my agitation as well as I could till the head of the officer of marines
who stood near me, being shot off, bounced from the deck athwart my
face, leaving me well nigh blinded with brains. I could contain myself
no longer, but began to bellow with all the strength of my lungs; when
a drummer, coming towards me asked if I was wounded, and, before I
could answer, received a great shot in his belly, which tore out his
entrails, and he fell flat on my breast. This accident entirely bereft
me of all discretion; I redoubled my cries, which were drowned in the
noise of the battle; and, finding myself disregarded, lost all
patience, and became frantic. I vented my rage in oaths and
execrations, till my spirits, being quite exhausted, I remained quiet,
as insensible of the load that oppressed me.

The engagement lasted till broad day, when Captain Oakum, finding he
was like to gain neither honour nor advantage by the affair, pretended
to be undeceived by seeing their colours; and, hailing the ship whom he
had fought all night, protested he believed them Spaniards; and the
guns being silenced on each side, ordered the barge to be hoisted out,
and went on board the French commodore. Our loss amounted to ten
killed, and eighteen wounded, most part of whom afterwards died. My
fellow-mates had no sooner despatched their business in the cock-pit,
than, full of friendly concern, they came to visit me. Morgan,
ascending first, and seeing my face almost covered with brains and
blood, concluded I was no longer a man for this world; and, calling to
Thompson with great emotion, bade him come up, and take his last
farewell of his comrade and countryman, who was posted to a better
place, where there were no Mackshanes nor Oakums to asperse and torment
him. “No,” said he, taking me by the hand, “you are going to a country
where there is more respect sown to unfortunate shentlemen, and where
you will have the satisfaction of peholding your adversaries tossing
upon pillows of purning primstone.” Thompson, alarmed at this
apostrophe, made haste to the place where I lay, and sitting down by
me, with tears in his eyes inquired into the nature of my calamity. By
this time I had recollected myself so far as to be able to converse
rationally with my friends, whom, to their great satisfaction, I
immediately undeceived with regard to their apprehension of my being
mortally wounded.

After I had got myself disengaged from the carnage in which I wallowed,
and partaken of a refreshment which my friends brought along with them,
we entered into discourse upon the hardships we sustained, and spoke
very freely of the author of our misery; but our discourse being
overheard by the sentinel who guarded me, he was no sooner relieved
than he reported to the captain every syllable of our conversation,
according to the orders he had received. The effect of this information
soon appeared in the arrival of the master-at-arms, who replaced Morgan
in his former station, and gave the second mate a caution to keep a
strict guard over his tongue, if he did not choose to accompany us in
our confinement. Thompson, foreseeing that the whole slavery of
attending the sick and wounded, as well as the cruelty of Mackshane,
must now fall upon his shoulders, grew desperate at the prospect, and,
though I never heard him swear before, imprecated dreadful curses on
the heads of his oppressors, declaring that he would rather quit life
altogether than be much longer under the power of such barbarians. I
was not a little startled at his vivacity, and endeavoured to alleviate
his complaints, by representing the subject of my own, with as much
aggravation as it would bear, by which comparison he might see the
balance of misfortune lay on my side, and take an example from me of
fortitude and submission, till such time as we could procure redress,
which I hoped was not far off, considering that we should probably be
in a harbour in less than three days, where we should have an
opportunity of preferring our complaints to the admiral. The Welshman
joined in my remonstrance, and was at great pains to demonstrate that
it was every man’s duty as well as interest to resign himself to the
divine will, and look upon himself as a sentinel upon duty, who is by
no means at liberty to leave his post before he is relieved. Thompson
listened attentively to what he said, and at last, shedding a flood of
tears, shook his hand, and left us without making any reply. About
eleven at night he came to see us again with a settled gloom on his
countenance, and gave us to understand that he had undergone excessive
toil since he saw us, and in recompense had been grossly abused by the
doctor, who taxed him with being confederate with us, in a design of
taking away his life and that of the captain. After some time spent in
mutual exhortation, he got up, and squeezing me by the hand with
uncommon fervour, cried, “God bless you both!” and left us to wonder at
his singular manner of parting with us, which did not fail to make a
deep impression on us both.

Next morning, when the hour of visitation came round, the unhappy young
man was missing, and, after strict search, supposed to have gone
overboard in the night; and this was certainly the case.




CHAPTER XXX


We lament the fate of our companion—the Captain offers Morgan his
liberty, which he refuses to accept—we are brought before him and
examined—Morgan is sent back into custody, whither also I am remanded
after a curious trial


The news of this event affected my fellow prisoner and me extremely, as
our unfortunate companion had justly acquired by his amiable
disposition the love and esteem of us both; and the more we regretted
his untimely fate, the greater horror we conceived for the villain who
was undoubtedly the occasion of it. This abandoned miscreant did not
discover the least symptom of concern for Thompson’s death, although he
must have been conscious to himself of having driven him by ill usage
to the fatal resolution, but desired the captain to set Morgan at
liberty again to look after the patients. Accordingly one of the
corporals was sent up to unfetter him, but he protested he would not be
released until he should know for what he was confined; nor would he be
a tennisball, nor a shuttlecock, nor a trudge, nor a scullion, to any
captain under the sun. Oakum, finding him obstinate, and fearing it
would not be in his power to exercise his tyranny much longer with
impunity, was willing to show some appearance of justice and therefore
ordered us both to be brought before him on the quarter-deck, where he
sat in state, with his cleric on one side, and his counsellor Mackshane
on the other. When we approached, he honoured us with this salutation:
“So, gentlemen, d—n my blood! many a captain in the navy would have
ordered you both to be tucked up to the yard’s arm, without either
judge or jury, for the crimes you have been guilty of; but, d—n my
blood, I have too much good nature in allowing such dogs as you to make
defence.” “Captain Oakum,” said my fellow-sufferer, “certainly it is in
your power (Cot help the while) to tack us all up at your will, desire,
and pleasures. And perhaps it would be petter for some of us to be
tucked up than to undergo the miseries to which we have been exposed.
So may the farmer hang his kids for his diversion, and amusement, and
mirth; but there is such a thing as justice, if not upon earth, surely
in heaven, that will punish with fire and primstone all those who take
away the lives of innocent people out of wantonness, and parparity
(look you). In the mean time. I shall be glad to know the crimes laid
to my charge, and see the person who accuses me.” “That you shall,”
said the captain; “here, doctor, what have you to say?” Mackshane,
stepping forward, hemmed a good while, in order to clear his throat,
and, before he began, Morgan accosted him thus: “Doctor Mackshane, look
in my face—look in the face of an honest man, who abhors a false
witness as he abhors the tevil, and Cot be judge between you and me.”
The doctor, not minding this conjuration, made the following speech, as
near as I can remember: “I’ll tell you what, Mr. Morgan; to be sure
what you say is just, in regard to an honest man, and if so be it
appears as how you are an honest man, then it is my opinion that you
deserve to be acquitted, in relation to that there affair, for I tell
you what, Captain Oakum is resolved for to do everybody justice. As for
my own part, all that I have to allege is, that I have been informed
you have spoken disrespectful words against your captain, who, to be
sure, is the most honourable and generous commander in the king’s
service, without asparagement or acception of man, woman, or child.”

Having uttered this elegant harangue, on which he seemed to plume
himself, Morgan replied, “I do partly guess, and conceive, and
understand your meaning, which I wish could be more explicit; but,
however, I do suppose, I am not to be condemned upon bare hearsay; or,
if I am convicted of speaking disrespectfully of Captain Oakum, I hope
there is no treason in my words.” “But there’s mutiny, by G—d, and
that’s death by the articles of war!” cried Oakum: “In the meantime,
let the witnesses be called.” Hereupon Mackshane’s servant appeared,
and the boy of our mess, whom they had seduced and tutored for the
purpose. The first declared, that Morgan as he descended the
cockpit-ladder one day, cursed the captain, and called him a savage
beast, saying, he ought to be hunted down as an enemy to mankind.
“This,” said the clerk, “is a strong presumption of a design, formed
against the captain’s life. For why? It presupposes malice
aforethought, and a criminal intention a priori.” “Right,” said the
captain to this miserable grub, who had been an attorney’s boy, “you
shall have law enough: here’s Cook and Littlejohn to it.” This evidence
was confirmed by the boy, who affirmed, he heard the first mate say,
that the captain had no more bowels than a bear, and the surgeon had no
more brain than an ass. Then the sentinel, who heard our discourse on
the poop was examined, and informed the court that the Welshman assured
me, Captain Oakum and Doctor Mackshane would toss upon billows of
burning brimstone in hell for their barbarity. The clerk observed, that
there was an evident prejudication, which confirmed the former
suspicion of a conspiracy against the life of Captain Oakum; for,
because, how could Morgan so positively pronounce that the captain and
surgeon would d—n’d, unless he had intention to make away with them
before they could have time to repent? This sage explanation had great
weight with our noble commander, who exclaimed, “What have you to say
to this, Taffy? you seem to be taken all a-back, brother, ha!” Morgan
was too much of a gentleman to disown the text, although he absolutely
denied the truth of the comment. Upon which the captain, strutting up
to him with a ferocious countenance, said, “So Mr. son of a bitch, you
confess you honoured me with the names of bear and beast, and
pronounced my damnation? D—n my heart! I have a good mind to have you
brought to a court-martial and hang’d, you dog.” Here Mackshane, having
occasion for an assistant, interposed, and begged the captain to pardon
Mr. Morgan with his wonted goodness, upon condition that he the
delinquent should make such submission as the nature of his
misdemeanour demanded. Upon which the Cambro-Briton, who on this
occasion would have made no submission to the Great Mogul, surrounded
with his guards, thanked the doctor for his mediation, and acknowledged
himself in the wrong for calling the image of Cot a peast, “but,” said
he, “I spoke by metaphor, and parable, and comparison, and types; as we
signify meekness by a lamb, lechery by a goat, and craftiness by a fox;
so we liken ignorance to an ass, and brutality to a bear, and fury to a
tiger; therefore I made use of these similes to express my sentiments
(look you), and what I said before Cot, I will not unsay before man nor
peast neither.”

Oakum was so provoked at this insolence (as he termed it,) that he
ordered him forthwith to be carried to the place of his confinement,
and his clerk to proceed on the examination of me. The first question
put to me was touching the place of my nativity, which I declared to be
the north of Scotland. “The north of Ireland more like!” cried the
captain; “but we shall bring you up presently.” He then asked what
religion I professed; and when I answered “the Protestant,” swore I was
an arrant Roman as ever went to mass. “Come, come, clerk,” continued
he, “catechise him a little on this subject.” But before I relate the
particulars of the clerk’s inquiries, it will not be amiss to inform
the reader that our commander himself was an Hibernian, and, if not
shrewdly belied, a Roman Catholic to boot. “You say, you are a
Protestant,” said the clerk; “make the sign of the cross with your
finger, so, and swear upon it to that affirmation.” When I was about to
perform the ceremony, the captain cried with some emotion, “No, no,
d—me! I’ll have no profanation neither. But go on with your
interrogations.” “Well then,” proceeded my examiner, “how many
sacraments are there?” To which I replied, “Two.” “What are they?” said
he. I answered, “Baptism and the Lord’s Supper.” “And so you would
explode confirmation and marriage altogether?” said Oakum. “I thought
this fellow was a rank Roman.” The clerk, though he was bred under an
attorney, could not refrain from blushing at this blunder, which he
endeavoured to conceal, by observing, that these decoys would not do
with me, who seemed to be an old offender. He went on with asking, if I
believed in transubstantiation; but I treated the notion of real
presence with such disrespect, that his patron was scandalised at my
impiety, and commanded him to proceed to the plot. Whereupon this
miserable pettifogger told me, there was great reason to suspect me of
being a spy on board, and that I had entered into a conspiracy with
Thompson, and others not yet detected, against the life of Captain
Oakum, which accusation they pretended to support by the evidence of
our boy, who declared he had often heard the deceased Thompson and me
whispering together, and could distinguish the words, “Oakum, rascal,
poison, pistol;” by which expressions it appeared, we did intend to use
sinister means to accomplish his destruction. That the death of
Thompson seemed to confirm this conjecture, who, either feeling the
stings of remorse for being engaged in such a horrid confederacy, or
fearing a discovery, by which he must have infallibly suffered an
ignominious death, had put a fatal period to his own existence. But
what established the truth of the whole was, a book in cyphers found
among my papers, which exactly tallied with one found in his chest,
after his disappearance. This, he observed, was a presumption very near
positive proof, and would determine any jury in Christendom to find me
guilty. In my own defence, I alleged, that I had been dragged on board
at first very much against my inclination, as I could prove by the
evidence of some people now in the ship, consequently could have no
design of becoming spy at that time; and ever since had been entirely
out of the reach of any correspondence that could justly entail that
suspicion upon me. As for conspiring against my captain’s life, it
could not be supposed that any man in his right wits would harbour the
least thought of such an undertaking, which he could not possibly
perform without certain infamy and ruin to himself, even if he had all
the inclination in the world. That, allowing the boy’s evidence to be
true (which I affirmed was false and malicious), nothing conclusive
could be gathered from a few incoherent words; neither was the fate of
Mr. Thompson a circumstance more favourable for the charge; for I had
in my pocket a letter which too well explained that mystery, in a very
different manner from that which was supposed. With these words, I
produced the following letter, which Jack Rattlin brought to me the
very day after Thompson disappeared; and told me it was committed to
his care by the deceased, who made him promise not to deliver it
sooner. The clerk, taking it out of my hand, read aloud the contents,
which were these;

‘Dear Friend,—I am so much oppressed with the fatigue I daily and
nightly undergo, and the barbarous usage of Doctor Mackshane, who is
bent on your destruction as well as mine, that I am resolved to free
myself from this miserable life, and, before you receive this, shall be
no more. I could have wished to die in your good opinion, which I am
afraid I shall forfeit by the last act of my life; but, if you cannot
acquit me, I know you will at least preserve some regard for the memory
of an unfortunate young man who loved you. I recommend it to you, to
beware of Mackshane, whose revenge is implacable. I wish all prosperity
to you and Mr. Morgan, to whom pray offer my last respects, and beg to
be remembered as your unhappy friend and countryman,


‘William Thompson.’


This letter was no sooner read, than Mackshane, in a transport of rage,
snatched it out of the clerk’s hands, and tore it into a thousand
pieces, saying, it was a villainous forgery, contrived and executed by
myself. The captain and clerk declared themselves of the same opinion,
although I insisted of having the remains of it compared with other
writings of Thompson, which they had in their possession; and I was
ordered to answer the last article of my accusation, namely, the book
of ciphers found among my papers. “That is easily done,” said I. “What
you are pleased to call ciphers, are no other than the Greek
characters, in which, for my amusement, I keep a diary of everything
remarkable that has occurred to my observation since the beginning of
the voyage, till the day in which I was put in irons; and the same
method was practised by Mr. Thompson, who copied mine.” “A very likely
story,” cried Mackshane; “what occasion was there for using Greek
characters, if you were not afraid of discovering what you had wrote?
But what d’ye talk of Greek characters? D’ye think I am so ignorant of
the Greek language, as not to distinguish its letters from these, which
are no more Greek than Chinese? No, no, I will not give up my knowledge
of the Greek for you, nor none that ever came from your country.” So
saying, with an unparalleled effrontery, he repeated some gibberish,
which by the sound seemed to be Irish, and made it pass for Greek with
the captain, who, looking at me with a contemptuous sneer, exclaimed,
“Ah, ah! have you caught a tartar?” I could not help smiling at the
consummate assurance of this Hibernian, and offered to refer the
dispute to anybody on board who understood the Greek alphabet. Upon
which Morgan was brought back, and, being made acquainted with the
affair, took the book, and read a whole page in English, without
hesitation, deciding the controversy in my favour. The doctor was so
far from being out of countenance at this detection, that he affirmed
Morgan was in the secret, and repeated from his own invention. Oakum
said, “Ay, ay, I see they are both in a story;” and dismissed my
fellow-mate to his cockloft, although I proposed that he and I should
read and translate, separately, any chapter or verse in the Greek
Testament in his possession, by which it would appear whether we or the
surgeon spoke truth. Not being endued with eloquence enough to convince
the captain that there could be no juggle nor confederacy in this
expedient, I begged to be examined by some unconcerned person on board,
who understood Greek. Accordingly, the whole ship’s company, officers
and all, were called upon deck, among whom it was proclaimed that, if
anyone of them could speak Greek, he or they so qualified should ascend
the quarter-deck immediately. After some pause, two foremast men came
up, and professed their skill in that language, which, they said, they
acquired during several voyages to the Levant, among the Greeks of the
Morea. The captain exulted much in this declaration, and put my journal
book into the hands of one of them, who candidly owned he could neither
read nor write; the other acknowledged the same degree of ignorance,
but pretended to speak the Greek lingo with any man on board; and,
addressing himself to me, pronounced some sentences of a barbarous
corrupted language, which I did not understand. I asserted that the
modern Greek was as different from that spoken and written by the
ancients, as the English used now from the old Saxon spoke in the time
of Hengist: and, as I had only learned the true original tongue, in
which Homer, Pindar, the Evangelists, and other great men of antiquity
wrote, it could not be supposed that I should know anything of an
imperfect Gothic dialect that rose on the ruins of the former, and
scarce retained any traces of the old expression: but, if Doctor
Mackshane, who pretended to be master of the Greek language, could
maintain a conversation with these seamen, I would retract what I had
said, and be content to suffer any punishment be should think proper to
inflict. I had no sooner uttered these words than the surgeon, knowing
one of the fellows to be his countryman, accosted him in Irish, and was
answered in the same brogue; then a dialogue ensued between them, which
they affirmed to be in Greek, after having secured the secrecy of the
other tar, who had his cue in the language of the Morea, from his
companion, before they would venture to assert such an intrepid
falsehood. “I thought,” said Oakum, “we should discover the imposture
at last. Let the rascal be carried back to his confinement. I find he
must dangle.” Having nothing further to urge in my own behalf, before a
court so prejudiced with spite, and fortified with ignorance against
truth, I suffered myself to be reconducted peaceably to my
fellow-prisoner, who, hearing the particulars of my trial, lifted up
his hands and eyes to Heaven, and uttered a dreadful groan: and, not
daring to disburden his thoughts to me by speech, lest he might be
overheard by the sentinel, burst forth into a Welsh song, which he
accompanied with a thousand contortions of face and violent gestures of
body.




CHAPTER XXXI


I discover a subornation against me, by means of a quarrel between two
of the evidences; in consequence of which I am set at liberty, and
prevail upon Morgan to accept of his freedom on the same
terms—Mackshane’s malice—we arrive at Jamaica, from whence in a short
time we beat up to Hispaniola, in conjunction with the West India
squadron—we take in water, sail again, and arrive at
Carthagena—Reflections on our conduct there


Meanwhile, a quarrel happening between the two modern Greeks, the one,
to be revenged of the other, came and discovered to us the mystery of
Mackshane’s dialogue, as I have explained it above. This detection
coming to the ears of the doctor, who was sensible that (now we were in
sight of Jamaica) we should have an opportunity of clearing ourselves
before a court-martial, and, at the same time, of making his malice and
ignorance conspicuous, he interceded for us with the captain so
effectually, that in a few hours we were set at liberty, and ordered to
return to our duty. This was a happy event for me, my whole body being
blistered by the sun, and my limbs benumbed by want of motion: but I
could scarce persuade the Welshman to accept of this indulgence, he
persisted in his obstinacy to remain in irons, until he should be
discharged by a court-martial, which, he believed would also do him
justice on his enemies. At length I represented to him the precarious
issue of a trial, the power and interest of his adversaries, and
flattered his revenge with the hope of wreaking his resentment with his
own hands upon Mackshane after our return to England. This last
argument had more weight with him than all the rest, and prevailed upon
him to repair with me to the cockpit, which I no sooner entered, than
the idea of my departed friend presented itself to my remembrance, and
filled my eyes with tears. We discharged from our mess the boy who had
acted so perfidiously, notwithstanding his tears, intreaties, and of
penitence for what he had done; but not before he had confessed that
the surgeon had bribed him to give evidence against us, with a pair of
stockings and a couple of old check shirts, of which his servant had
since plundered him.

The keys of our chests and lockers being sent to us by the doctor, we
detained the messenger until we had examined the contents; and my
fellow-mate, finding all his Cheshire cheese consumed to a crust, his
brandy exhausted, and his onions gone, was seized with a fit of choler,
which he discharged on Mackshane’s man in oaths and execrations,
threatening to prosecute him as a thief. The fellow swore in his turn,
that he never had the keys in his possession till that time, when he
received them from his master with orders to deliver them to us. “As
Cot is my judge,” cried Morgan, “and my salfation, and my witness;
whosoever has pilfered my provisions is a lousy, peggarly, rascally
knave! and by the soul of my grandsire, I will impeach, and accuse, and
indict him, of a roppery, if I did but know who he is.” Had this
misfortune happened at sea, where we could not repair the loss, in all
probability this descendant of Caractacus would have lost his wits
entirely; but, when I observed how easy it would be to remedy this
paltry mischance, he became more calm, and reconciled himself to the
occasion.

A little while after this transport the surgeon came into the birth,
under pretence of taking something out of the medicine chest, and, with
a smiling aspect, wished us joy of our deliverance, which, he said, he
had been at great pains to obtain of the captain, who was very justly
incensed at our behaviour; but he, the doctor, had passed his word for
our future conduct, and he hoped we should give him no cause to repent
of his kindness. He expected, no doubt, an acknowledgment from us for
this pretended piece of service, as well as a general amnesty of what
was past; but he had to do with people who were not quite so apt to
forgive injuries as he imagined, or to forget that, if our deliverance
was owing to his mediation, our calamity was occasioned by his malice;
I therefore sat silent, while my companion answered, “Ay, ay, ’tis no
matter, Cot knows the heart; there is a time for all things, as the
wise man saith; there is a time for throwing away stones, and to gather
them up.” He seemed to be disconcerted at this reply, and went away in
a pet, muttering something about “Ingratitude,” and “Fellows,” of which
we did not think fit to take any notice.

Our fleet, having joined another that waited for us, lay at anchor
about a month in the harbour of Port Royal in Jamaica, during which
time something of consequence was certainly transacted; notwithstanding
the insinuations of some, who affirmed we had no business at all in
that place; that, in order to take the advantage of the season proper
for our enterprise, the West India squadron, which had previous notice
of our coming, ought to have joined us at the west end of Hispaniola,
with necessary stores and refreshments, from whence we could have
sailed directly for Carthagena, before the enemy could put themselves
in a good posture of defence, or, indeed, have an inkling of our
design. Be this as it will, we sailed from Jamaica, and, in ten days or
a fortnight, beat up against the wind as far as the Isle of Vache, with
an intention, as was said, to attack the French fleet, then supposed to
be lying near that place; but before we arrived, they had sailed for
Europe, having first dispatched an advice-boat to Carthagena, with an
account of our being in those seas, as also of our strength and
destination. We loitered here some days longer, taking in wood and
brackish water, in the use whereof, however, our admiral seemed to
consult the health of the men, by restricting each to a quart a day.

At length we set sail, and arrived in a bay to the windward of
Carthagena, where we came to an anchor, and lay at our ease ten days
longer. Here, again, certain malicious people took occasion to blame
the conduct of their superiors, by saying, that in so doing they not
only unprofitably wasted time, which was very precious, considering the
approach of the rainy season, but also allowed the Spaniards to
recollect themselves from a terror occasioned by the approach of an
English fleet, at least three times as numerous as ever appeared in
that part of the world before. But if I might be allowed to give my
opinion of the matter, I would ascribe this delay to the generosity of
our chiefs, who scorned to take any advantage that fortune might give
them even over an enemy. At last, however, we weighed, and anchored
again somewhat nearer the harbour’s mouth, where we made shift to land
our marines, who encamped on the beach, in despite of the enemy’s shot,
which knocked a good many of them on the head. This piece of conduct,
in choosing a camp under the walls of an enemy’s fortification, which I
believe never happened before, was practised, I presume, with a view of
accustoming the soldiers to stand fire, who were not as yet much used
to discipline, most of them having been taken from the plough-tail a
few months before. This expedient, again, has furnished matter for
censure against the ministry, for sending a few raw recruits on such an
important enterprise, while so many veteran regiments lay inactive at
home. But surely our governors had their reasons for so doing, which
possibly may be disclosed with other secrets of the deep. Perhaps they
were loth to risk their best troops on such desperate service, or the
colonel and the field officers of the old corps, who, generally
speaking, enjoyed their commissions as sinecures or pensions, for some
domestic services rendered to the court, refused to embark in such a
dangerous and precarious undertaking; for which refusal, no doubt, they
are to be much commended.




CHAPTER XXXII


Our Land Forces being disembarked, erect a fascine battery—our ship is
ordered, with four more, to batter the port of Bocca Chica—Mackshane’s
cowardice—the Chaplain’s frenzy—honest Rattlin loses one hand—his
heroism and reflections on the battle—Crampley’s behaviour to me during
the heat of the Fight


Our forces being landed and stationed as I have already mentioned, set
about erecting a fascine battery to cannonade the principal fort of the
enemy; and in something more than three weeks, it was ready to open.
That we might do the Spaniards as much honour as possible, it was
determined, in a council of war, that five of our largest ships should
attack the fort on one side, while the battery, strengthened by two
mortars and twenty-four cohorns, should ply it on the other.

Accordingly, the signal for our ship to engage, among others, was
hoisted, we being advertised, the night before, to make everything
clear for that purpose; and, in so doing, a difference happened between
Captain Oakum and his well-beloved cousin and counsellor Mackshane,
which had well nigh terminated in an open rupture. The doctor, who had
imagined there was no more danger of being hurt by the enemy’s shot in
the cockpit than in the centre of the earth, was lately informed that a
surgeon’s mate had been killed in that part of the ship by a
cannon-ball from two small redoubts that were destroyed before the
disembarkation of our soldiers; and therefore insisted upon having a
platform raised for the convenience of the sick and wounded in the
after-hold, where he deemed himself more secure than on the deck above.
The captain, offended at this extraordinary proposal, accused him of
pusillanimity, and told him, there was no room in the hold for such an
occasion: or, if there was, he could not expect to be indulged more
than the rest of the surgeons of the navy, who used the cockpit for
that purpose. Fear rendering Mackshane obstinate, he persisted in his
demand, and showed his instructions, by which it was authorised; the
captain swore these instructions were dictated by a parcel of lazy
poltroons who were never at sea; nevertheless he was obliged to comply,
and sent for the carpenter to give him orders about it. But, before any
such measure could be taken, our signal was thrown out, and the doctor
compelled to trust his carcass in the cockpit, where Morgan and I were
busy in putting our instruments and dressings in order.

Our ship, with others destined for this service, immediately weighed,
and in less than half-an-hour came to an anchor before the castle of
Bocca Chica, with a spring upon our cable, and the cannonading (which
indeed was dreadful) began. The surgeon, after having crossed himself,
fell flat on the deck; and the chaplain and purser, who were stationed
with us in quality of assistants, followed his example, while the
Welshman and I sat upon a chest looking at one another with great
discomposure, scarce able to refrain from the like prostration. And
that the reader may know it was not a common occasion that alarmed us
thus, I must inform him of the particulars of this dreadful din that
astonished us. The fire of the Spaniards proceeded from eighty-four
great guns, besides a mortar and small arms, in Bocca Chica; thirty-six
in Fort St. Joseph; twenty in two fascine batteries, and four
men-of-war, mounting sixty-four guns each. This was answered by our
land-battery mounted with twenty-one cannon, two mortars, and
twenty-four cohorns, and five great ships of seventy or eighty guns,
that fired without intermission.

We had not been many minutes engaged, when one of the sailors brought
another on his back to the cockpit, where he tossed him down like a bag
of oats, and pulling out his pouch, put a large chew of tobacco in his
mouth without speaking a word. Morgan immediately examined the
condition of the wounded man, and cried out, “As I shall answer now,
the man is as dead as my great grandfather.” “Dead,” said his comrade;
“he may be dead now, for aught I know, but I’ll be d—d if he was not
alive when I took him up.” So saying, he was about to return to his
quarters, when I bade him carry the body along with him, and throw it
overboard. “D—n the body!” said he, “I think ’tis fair enough if I take
care of my own.” My fellow mate, snatching up the amputation knife,
pursued him half-way up the cock-pit ladder, crying, “You lousy rascal,
is this the churchyard, or the charnel-house, or the sepulchre, or the
golgotha, of the ship?”—but was stopped in his career by one calling,
“Yo he, avast there—scaldings!” “Scaldings!” answered Morgan; “Cot
knows ’tis hot enough indeed: who are you?” “Here’s one!” replied the
voice; and I immediately knew it to be that of my honest friend Jack
Rattlin, who coming towards me, told me, with great deliberation, he
was come to be docked at last, and discovered the remains of one hand,
which had been shattered to pieces with a grape shot. I lamented with
unfeigned sorrow his misfortune, which he bore with heroic courage,
observing, that every shot had its commission: “It was well it did not
take him in the head! or if it had, what then? he should have died
bravely, fighting for his king and country. Death was a debt which
every man owed, and must pay; and that now was as well as another
time.” I was much pleased and edified with the maxims of this
sea-philosopher, who endured the amputation of his left hand without
shrinking, the operation being performed (at his request) by me, after
Mackshane, who was with difficulty prevailed to lift his head from the
deck, had declared there was a necessity for his losing the limb.

While I was employed in dressing the stump, I asked Jack’s opinion of
the battle, who, shaking his head, frankly told me, he believed we
should do no good: “For why? because, instead of dropping anchor close
under shore, where we should have to deal with one corner of Bocca
Chica only, we had opened the harbour, and exposed ourselves to the
whole fire of the enemy from their shipping and Fort St. Joseph, as
well as from the castle we intended to cannonade; that, besides, we lay
at too great a distance to damage the walls, and three parts in four of
our shot did not take place; for there was scarce anybody on board who
understood the pointing of a gun. Ah! God help us!” continued he, “If
your kinsman, Lieutenant Bowling, had been here, we should have had
other guess work.” By this time, our patients had increased to such a
number, that we did not know which to begin with; and the first mate
plainly told the surgeon, that if he did not get up immediately and
perform his duty, he would complain of his behaviour to the admiral,
and make application for his warrant. This remonstrance effectually
roused Mackshane, who was never deaf to an argument in which he thought
his interest was concerned; he therefore rose up, and in order to
strengthen his resolution, had recourse more than once to a case-bottle
of rum, which he freely communicated to the chaplain, and purser, who
had as much need of such extraordinary inspiration as himself. Being
thus supported, he went to work, and arms and legs were hewed down
without mercy. The fumes of the liquor mounting into the parson’s
brain, conspired, with his former agitation of spirits, to make him
quite delirious; he stripped himself to the skin; and, besmearing his
body with blood, could scarce be withheld from running upon deck in
that condition. Jack Rattlin, scandalised at this deportment,
endeavoured to allay his transports with reason; but finding all he
said ineffectual, and great confusion occasioned by his frolics, he
knocked him down with his right hand, and by threats kept him quiet in
that state of humiliation. But it was not in the power of rum to
elevate the purser, who sat on the floor wringing his hands, and
cursing the hour in which he left his peaceable profession of a brewer
in Rochester, to engage in such a life of terror and disquiet.

While we diverted ourselves at the expense of this poor devil, a shot
happened to take us between wind and water, and (its course being
through the purser’s store room) made a terrible havoc and noise among
the jars and bottles in its way, and disconcerted Mackshane so much,
that he dropped his scalpel, and falling down on his knees, pronounced
his Pater-noster aloud: the purser fell backward, and lay without sense
or motion; and the chaplain grew so outrageous, that Rattlin with one
hand could not keep him under; so that we were obliged to confine him
in the surgeon’s cabin, where he was no doubt guilty of a thousand
extravagancies. Much about this time, my old antagonist, Crampley, came
down, with express orders, as he said, to bring me up to the
quarter-deck, to dress a slight wound the captain had received by a
splinter: his reason for honouring me in particular with this piece of
service, being, that in case I should be killed or disabled by the way,
my death or mutilation would be of less consequence to the ship’s
company than that of the doctor or his first mate. At another time,
perhaps, I might have disputed this order, to which I was not bound to
pay the least regard; but as I thought my reputation depended upon my
compliance, I was resolved to convince my rival that I was no more
afraid than he of exposing myself to danger. With this view I provided
myself with dressings, and followed him immediately to the
quarter-deck, through a most infernal scene of slaughter, fire, smoke,
and uproar. Captain Oakum, who leaned against the mizen-mast, no sooner
saw me approach in my shirt, with the sleeves tucked up to my armpits,
and my hands dyed with blood, than he signified his displeasure by a
frown, and asked why the doctor himself did not come? I told him that
Crampley had singled me out, as if by express command; at which reply
he seemed surprised, and threatened to punish the midshipman for his
presumption, after the engagement. In the meantime, I was sent back to
my station, and ordered to tell Mackshane, that the captain expected
him immediately. I got safe back, and delivered my commission to the
doctor, who flatly refused to quit the post assigned to him by his
instructions; whereupon Morgan, who I believe, was jealous of my
reputation for courage, undertook the affair, and ascended with great
intrepidity. The captain, finding the surgeon obstinate, suffered
himself to be dressed, and swore he would confine Mackshane as soon as
the service should be over.




CHAPTER XXXIII


A breach being made in the walls, our soldiers give the assault, and
take the place without opposition—our sailors at the same time, become
masters of all the other strengths near Bocca Chica, and take
possession of the harbour—the good consequence of this success—we move
nearer the town—find two forts deserted, and the Channel blocked up
with sunk vessels; which however we find means to clear—land our
soldiers at La Quinta—repulse a body of militia—attack the castle of
St. Lazar, and are forced to retreat with great loss—the remains of our
army are re-embarked—an effort of the Admiral to take the town—the
economy of our expedition described


Having cannonaded the fort during the space of four hours, we were all
ordered to slip our cables, and sheer off; but next day the engagement
was renewed, and continued from the morning till the afternoon, when
the enemy’s fire from Bocca Chica slackened, and towards evening was
quite silenced. A breach being made on the other side, by our land
battery, large enough to admit a middle-sized baboon, provided he could
find means to climb up to it, our general proposed to give the assault
that very night, and actually ordered a detachment on that duty.
Providence stood our friend upon this occasion, and put it into the
hearts of the Spaniards to abandon the fort, which might have been
maintained by resolute men till the day of judgment against all the
force we could exert in the attack. And while our soldiers took
possession of the enemy’s ramparts without resistance, the same good
luck attended a body of sailors, who made themselves masters of Fort
St. Joseph, the fascine batteries, and one Spanish man-of-war; the
other three being burnt or sunk by the foe, that they might not fall
into our hands. The taking of these forts, in the strength of which the
Spaniards chiefly confided, made us masters of the outward harbour, and
occasioned great joy among us, as we laid our accounts at finding
little or no opposition from the town: and indeed, if a few great ships
had sailed up immediately, before they had recovered from the confusion
and despair that our unexpected success had produced among them, it is
not impossible that we might have finished the affair to our
satisfaction, without any more bloodshed; but this step our heroes
disdained as a barbarous insult over the enemy’s distress, and gave
them all the respite they could desire, in order to recollect
themselves. In the meantime, Mackshane, taking the advantage of this
general exultation, waited on our captain, and pleaded his own cause so
effectually that he was re-established in his good graces; and as for
Crampley, there was no more notice taken of his behaviour towards me
during the action. But of all the consequences of the victory, none was
more grateful than plenty of fresh water, after we had languished five
weeks on the allowance of a purser’s quart per day for each man in the
Torrid Zone, where the sun was vertical, and the expense of bodily
fluid so great, that a gallon of liquor could scarce supply the waste
of twenty-four hours; especially as our provision consisted of putrid
salt beef, to which the sailors gave the name of Irish horse; salt
pork, of New England, which, though neither fish nor flesh, savoured of
both; bread from the same country, every biscuit whereof, like a piece
of clockwork, moved by its own internal impulse, occasioned by the
myriads of insects that dwelt within it; and butter served out by the
gill, that tasted like train oil thickened with salt. Instead of small
beer, each man was allowed three half-quarterns of brandy or rum, which
were distributed every morning, diluted with a certain quantity of his
water, without either sugar or fruit to render it palatable, for which
reason, this composition was by the sailors not ineptly styled
Necessity. Nor was this limitation of simple element owing to a
scarcity of it on board, for there was at this time water enough in the
ship for a voyage of six months, at the rate of half-a-gallon per day
to each man: but this fast must, I suppose, have been enjoined by way
of penance on the ship’s company for their sins; or rather with a view
to mortify them into a contempt of life, that they might thereby become
more resolute and regardless of danger. How simply then do those people
argue, who ascribe the great mortality among us, to our bad provision
and want of water; and affirm, that a great many valuable lives might
have been saved, if the useless transports had been employed in
fetching fresh stock, turtle, fruit, and other refreshments from
Jamaica and other adjacent islands, for the use of the army and fleet!
seeing it is to be hoped, that those who died went to a better place,
and those who survived were the more easily maintained. After all, a
sufficient number remained to fall before the walls of St. Lazar, where
they behaved like their own country mastiffs, which shut their eyes,
run into the jaws of a bear, and have their heads crushed for their
valour.

But to return to my narration. After having put garrisons into the
forts we had taken, and re-embarked our soldiers and artillery (a piece
of service that detained us more than a week), we ventured up to the
mouth of the inner harbour, guarded by a large fortification on one
side, and a small redoubt on the other, both of which were deserted
before our approach, and the entrance of the harbour blocked up by
several old galleons, and two men-of-war that the enemy had sunk in the
channel. We made shift, however, to open a passage for some ships, that
favoured a second landing of our troops at a place called La Quinta,
not far from the town, where, after a faint resistance from a body of
Spaniards, who opposed their disembarkation, they encamped with a
design of besieging the castle of St. Lazar, which overlooked and
commanded the city. Whether our renowned general had nobody in his army
who knew how to approach it in form, or that he trusted entirely to the
fame of his arms, I shall not determine; but, certain it is, a
resolution was taken in a council of war, to attack the place with
musketry only. This was put in execution, and succeeded accordingly;
the enemy giving them such a hearty reception, that the greatest part
of their detachment took up their everlasting residence on the spot.

Our chief, not relishing this kind of complaisance in the Spaniard’s,
was wise enough to retreat on board with the remains of his army,
which, from eight thousand able men landed on the beach near Bocca
Chica, was now reduced to fifteen hundred fit for service. The sick and
wounded were squeezed into certain vessels, which thence obtained the
name of hospital ships, though methinks they scarce deserved such a
creditable title, seeing few of them could boast of their surgeon,
nurse, or cook; and the space between decks was so confined that the
miserable patients had not room to sit upright in their beds. Their
wounds and stumps, being neglected, contracted filth and putrefaction,
and millions of maggots were hatched amidst the corruption of their
sores. This inhuman disregard was imputed to the scarcity of surgeons;
though it is well known that every great ship in the fleet could have
spared one at least for this duty, an expedient which would have been
more than sufficient to remove this shocking inconvenience. But perhaps
our general was too much of a gentleman to ask a favour of this kind
from his fellow chief, who, on the other hand, would not derogate so
much from his own dignity, as to offer such assistance unasked; for, I
may venture to affirm, that by this time the Demon of Discord, with her
sooty wings, had breathed her influence upon our councils; and it might
be said of these great men (I hope they will pardon the comparison) as
of Cesar and Pompey, the one could not brook a superior, and the other
was impatient of an equal; so that, between the pride of one and
insolence of another, the enterprise miscarried, according to the
proverb, “Between two stools the backside falls to the ground.” Not
that I would be thought to liken any public concern to that opprobrious
part of the human body, though I might with truth assert, if I durst
use such a vulgar idiom, that the nation did hang on arse at its
disappointment on this occasion; neither would I presume to compare the
capacity of our heroic leaders to any such wooden convenience as a
joint-stool or a close-stool; but only to signify by this simile, the
mistake the people committed in trusting to the union of two
instruments that were never joined.

A day or two after the attempt on St. Lazar, the admiral ordered one of
the Spanish men-of-war we had taken to be mounted with sixteen guns,
and manned with detachments from our great ships, in order to batter
the town; accordingly, she was towed into the inner harbour in the
night, and moored within half a mile of the walls, against which she
began to fire at daybreak; and continued about six hours exposed to the
opposition of at least thirty pieces of cannon, which at length obliged
our men to set her on fire, and get off as well as they could in their
boats. This piece of conduct afforded matter of speculation to all the
wits, either in the army or navy, who were at last fain to acknowledge
it a stroke of policy above their comprehension. Some entertained such
an irreverent opinion of the admiral’s understanding, as to think he
expected the town would surrender to his floating battery of sixteen
guns: others imagined his sole intention was to try the enemy’s
strength, by which he should be able to compute the number of great
ships that would be necessary to force the town to a capitulation. But
this last conjecture soon appeared groundless, inasmuch as no ships of
any kind whatever were afterwards employed on that service. A third
sort swore, that no other cause could be assigned for this undertaking
than that which induced Don Quixote to attack the windmill. A fourth
class (and that the most numerous, though, without doubt, composed of
the sanguine and malicious), plainly taxed this commander with want of
honesty as well as sense; and alleged that he ought to have sacrificed
private pique to the interest of his country; that, where the lives of
so many brave fellow-citizens were concerned, he ought to have
concurred with the general without being solicited or even desired,
towards their preservation and advantage, that, if his arguments could
not dissuade him from a desperate enterprise, it was his duty to have
rendered it as practicable as possible, without running extreme hazard;
that this could have been done, with a good prospect of success, by
ordering five or six large ships to batter the town, while the land
forces stormed the castle; by these means a considerable diversion
would have been made in favour of those troops, who, in their march to
the assault and in the retreat, suffered much more from the town than
from the castle! that the inhabitants, seeing themselves vigorously
attacked on all hands, would have been divided, distracted, and
confused, and in all probability, unable to resist the assailants. But
all these suggestions surely proceeded from ignorance or malevolence,
or else the admiral would not have found it such an easy matter, at his
return to England, to justify his conduct to a ministry at once so
upright and discerning. True it is, that those who undertook to
vindicate him on the spot, asserted, that there was not water enough
for our great ships near the town: though this was a little
unfortunately urged, because there happened to be pilots in the fleet
perfectly well acquainted with the soundings of the harbour, who
affirmed there was water enough for five eighty-gun ships to lie
abreast almost up to the very walls. The disappointments we suffered
occasioned a universal dejection, which was not at all alleviated by
the objects that daily and hourly entertained our eyes, nor by the
prospect of what must have inevitably happened, had we remained much
longer in this place. Such was the economy in some ships that, rather
than be at the trouble of interring the dead, their commanders ordered
their men to throw their bodies overboard, many without either ballast
or winding-sheet; so that numbers of human carcases floated in the
harbour, until they were devoured by sharks and carrion crows, which
afforded no agreeable spectacle to those who survived. At the same time
the wet season began, during which a deluge of rain falls, from the
rising to the setting sun, without intermission, and that no sooner
ceases than it begins to thunder, and lighten with such continued
flashing, that one can see to read a very small print by the
illumination.




CHAPTER XXXIV


An epidemic Fever rages among us—we abandon our Conquests—I am seized
with Distemper—write a Petition to the Captain, which is rejected—I am
in danger of Suffocation through the Malice of Crampley, and relieved
by a Serjeant—my Fever increases—the Chaplain wants to confess me—I
obtain a favourable Crisis—Morgan’s Affection for me proved—the
Behaviour of Mackshane and Crampley towards me—Captain Oakum is removed
into another Ship with his beloved Doctor—our new Captain described—An
Adventure of Morgan


The change of the atmosphere, occasioned by this phenomenon, conspired,
with the stench that surrounded us, the heat of the climate, our own
constitutions, impoverished by bad provisions, and our despair, to
introduce the bilious fever among us, which raged with such violence,
that three-fourths of those whom it invaded died in a deplorable
manner; the colour of their skin being, by the extreme putrefaction of
the juices, changed into that of soot.

Our conductors, finding things in this situation, perceived it was high
to relinquish our conquests, and this we did, after having rendered
their artillery useless, and blown up their walls with gunpowder. Just
as we sailed from Bocca Chica, on our return to Jamaica, I found myself
threatened with the symptoms of this terrible distemper; and knowing
very well that I stood no chance for my life, if I should be obliged to
be in the cockpit, which by this time was grown intolerable, even to
people in health, by reason of the heat and unwholesome smell of
decayed provision, I wrote a petition to the captain, representing my
case, and humbly imploring his permission to be among the soldiers in
the middle deck, for the benefit of the air: but I might have spared
myself the trouble; for this humane commander refused my request, and
ordered me to continue in the place allotted for the surgeon’s mates,
or else be contented to be in the hospital, which, by the by, was three
degrees more offensive and more suffocating than our own berth below.
Another, in my condition, perhaps, would have submitted to his fate,
and died in a pet; but I could not brook the thought of perishing so
pitifully, after I had weathered so many gales of hard fortune: I
therefore, without minding Oakum’s injunction, prevailed upon the
soldiers (whose good-will I had acquired) to admit my hammock among
them; and actually congratulated myself upon my comfortable situation;
which Crampley no sooner understood, than he signified to the captain
my contempt of his orders, and was invested with power to turn me down
again into my proper habitation.

This barbarous piece of revenge incensed me so much against the author,
that I vowed, with bitter imprecations, to call him to a severe
account, if ever it should be in my power; and the agitation of my
spirits increased my fever to a violent degree. While I lay gasping for
breath in this infernal abode, I was visited by a sergeant, the bones
of whose nose I had reduced and set to rights, after they had been
demolished by a splinter during our last engagement; he, being informed
of my condition, offered me the use of his berth in the middle deck,
which was enclosed with canvas, and well aired by a port-hole that
remained open within it. I embraced this proposal with joy, and was
immediately conducted to the place, where I was treated, while my
illness lasted, with the utmost tenderness and care by this grateful
halberdier, who had no other bed for himself than a hencoop during the
whole passage. Here I lay and enjoyed the breeze, notwithstanding which
my malady gained ground, and at length my life was despaired of, though
I never lost hopes of recovery, even when I had the mortification to
see, from my cabin-window, six or seven thrown overboard every day, who
died of the same distemper. This confidence, I am persuaded, conduced a
great deal to the preservation of my life, especially when joined to
another resolution I took at the beginning, namely, to refuse all
medicine, which I could not help thinking co-operated with the disease,
and, instead of resisting putrefaction, promoted a total degeneracy of
the vital fluid. When my friend Morgan, therefore, brought his
diaphoretic bolases, I put them into my mouth, ’tis true, but without
any intention of swallowing them: and, when he went away, spit them
out, and washed my mouth with water-gruel. I seemingly complied in this
matter, that I might not affront the blood of Caractacus, by a refusal
which might have intimated a diffidence of his physical capacity, for
he acted as my physician; Doctor Mackshane never once inquiring about
me, or even knowing where I was. When my distemper was at the height,
Morgan thought my case desperate, and, after having applied a blister
to the nape of my neck, squeezed my hand, bidding me, with a woful
countenance, recommend myself to Cot and my Reteemer; then, taking his
leave, desired the chaplain to come and administer some spiritual
consolation to me; but, before he arrived, I made shift to rid myself
of the troublesome application the Welshman had bestowed on my back.
The person, having felt my pulse, inquired into the nature of my
complaints, hemmed a little, and began thus: “Mr. Random, God out of
his infinite mercy has been pleased to visit you with a dreadful
distemper, the issue of which no man knows. You may be permitted to
recover and live many days on the face of the earth; and, which is more
probable, you may be taken away, and cut off in the flower of your
youth. It is incumbent on you, therefore, to prepare for the great
change, by repenting sincerely of your sins; of this there cannot be a
greater sign, than an ingenuous confession, which I conjure you to make
without hesitation or mental reservation; and, when I am convinced of
your sincerity, I will then give you such comfort as the situation of
your soul will admit of. Without doubt, you have been guilty of
numberless transgressions to which youth is subject, as swearing,
drunkenness, whoredom, and adultery: tell me therefore, without
reserve, the particulars of each, especially of the last, that I may be
acquainted with the true state of your conscience; for no physician
will prescribe for his patient until he knows the circumstances of his
disease.”

As I was not under any apprehensions of death, I could not help smiling
at the chaplain’s inquisitive remonstrance, which I told him savoured
more of the Roman than of the Protestant church, in recommending
auricular confession; a thing, in my opinion, not at all necessary to
salvation, and which, for that reason, I declined. This reply
disconcerted him a little; however, he explained away his meaning, in
making learned distinctions between what was absolutely necessary and
what was only convenient; then proceeded to ask what religion I
professed. I answered, that I had not as yet considered the difference
of religions, consequently had not fixed on any one in particular, but
that I was bred a Presbyterian. At this word the chaplain expressed
great astonishment, and said, he could not comprehend how a
presbyterian was entitled to any post under the English government.
Then he asked if I had ever received the sacrament, or taken the oaths;
to which questions, I replying in the negative, he held up his hands,
assured me he could do me no service, wished I might not be in a state
of reprobation, and returned to his messmates, who were making merry in
the ward-room, round a table well stored with bumbo(2) and wine.

(2)bumbo is a liquor composed of rum, sugar, water, and nutmeg


This insinuation, terrible as it was, had not such an effect upon me as
the fever, which, soon after he had left me, grew outrageous. I began
to see strange chimeras and concluded myself upon the point of being
delirious; in the meantime, being in great danger of suffocation, I
started up in a kind of frantic fit, with an intention to plunge myself
into the sea; and, as my friend the sergeant was not present, would
certainly have cooled myself to some purpose, had I not perceived a
moisture upon my thigh, as I endeavoured to get out of my hammock: the
appearance of this revived my hopes, and I had reflection and
resolution enough to take the advantage of this favourable symptom, by
tearing the shirt from my body, and the sheets from my bed, and
wrapping myself in a thick blanket, in which inclosure, for about a
quarter of an hour, felt all the pains of hell: but it was not long
before I was recompensed for my suffering by a profuse sweat, that,
bursting from the whole surface of my skin, in less than two hours,
relieved me from all my complaints except that of weakness; and left me
as hungry as a kite. I enjoyed a very comfortable nap, after which I
was regaling myself with the agreeable reverie of future happiness,
when I heard Morgan, on the outside of the curtain, ask the sergeant if
I was alive still? “Alive!” cried the other, “God forbid he should be
otherwise! he has lain quiet these five hours, and I do not choose to
disturb him, for sleep will do him great service.” “Ay,” said my
fellow-mate, “he sleeps so sound (look you), that he will not waken
till the great trump plows—Cot be merciful to his soul. He has paid his
debt like an honest man—ay, and moreover, he is at rest from all
persecutions, and troubles, and afflictions, of which, Cot knows, and I
know, he had his own share—Ochree! Ochree! he was a promising youth
indeed!” So saying he groaned grievously, and began to whine in such a
manner, as persuaded me he had a real friendship for me. The sergeant,
alarmed at his words, came into the berth, and, while he looked upon
me, I smiled, and tipped him the wink: he immediately guessed my
meaning and remaining silent, Morgan was confirmed in his opinion of my
being dead; whereupon he approached, with tears in his eyes, in order
to indulge his grief with a sight of the object: and I counterfeited
death so well, by fixing my eyes and dropping my under-jaw, that he
said, “There he lies, no petter than a lump of clay, Cot help me!” and
observed, by the distortion of my face, that I must have had a strong
struggle.

I should not have been able to contain myself much longer, when he
began to perform the last duty of a friend, in closing my eyes and my
mouth, upon which I suddenly snapped at his fingers and discomposed him
so much that he started back, turned pale as ashes, and stared like the
picture of horror; although I could not help laughing at his
appearance, I was concerned for his situation, and stretched out my
hand, telling him I hoped to live and eat some salmagundy of his making
in England. It was some time before he could recollect himself so far
as to feel my pulse, and inquire into the particulars of my disease;
but when he found I had enjoyed a favourable crisis, he congratulated
me upon my good fortune; not failing to ascribe it, under Cot, to the
blister he had applied to my back, at his last visit; which, by the
bye, said he, must now be removed and dressed; he was actually going to
fetch dressings, when I, feigning astonishment, said, “Bless me! sure
you never applied a blister to me—there is nothing on my back, I assure
you.” But he could not be convinced till he had examined it, and then
endeavoured to conceal his confusion, by expressing his surprise in
finding the skin untouched and the plaster missing. In order to excuse
myself for paying so little regard to his prescription, I pretended to
have been insensible when it was put on, and to have pulled it off
afterwards in a fit of delirium. This apology satisfied my friend, who,
on this occasion, abated a good deal of his stiffness in regard to
punctilio; and as we were now safely arrived at Jamaica, where I had
the benefit of fresh provisions and other refreshments, I recovered
strength every day, and, in a short time, my health and vigour were
perfectly re-established.

When I got up at first, and was just able to crawl about the deck with
a staff in my hand, I met Doctor Mackshane, who passed by me with a
disdainful look, and did not vouchsafe to honour me with one word.
After him came Crampley, who, strutting up to me with a fierce
countenance, pronounced, “Here’s fine discipline on-board, when such
lazy, skulking sons of bitches as you are allowed, on pretence of
sickness, to lollop at your ease, while your betters are kept to hard
duty!” The sight and behaviour of this malicious scoundrel enraged me
so much that I could scarce refrain from laying my cudgel across his
pate; but when I considered my present feebleness, and the enemies I
had in the ship, who wanted only a pretence to ruin me, I restrained my
passion, and contented myself with telling him, I had not forgot his
insolence and malice, and that I hoped we should meet one day on shore.
At this declaration he grinned, shook his fist, and swore he longed for
nothing more than such an opportunity. Meanwhile our ship was ordered
to be heaved down, victualled, and watered, for her return to England;
and our captain, for some reason or other, not thinking it convenient
for him to revisit his native country at this time, exchanged with a
gentleman, who, on the other hand, wished for nothing so much as to be
safe without the tropic: all his care and tenderness of himself being
insufficient to preserve his complexion from the injuries of the sun
and weather.

Our tyrant having left the ship, and carried his favourite Mackshane
along with him, to my inexpressible satisfaction, our new commander
came on board in a ten-oared barge, overshadowed with a vast umbrella,
and appeared in everything the reverse of Oakum, being a tall, thin
young man, dressed in this manner: a white hat, garnished with a red
feather, adorned his head, from whence his hair flowed upon his
shoulders, in ringlets tied behind with a ribbon. His coat, consisting
of pink-coloured silk, lined with white, by the elegance of the cut
retired backward, as it were, to discover a white satin waistcoat
embroidered with gold, unbuttoned at the upper part to display a brooch
set with garnets, that glittered in the breast of his shirt, which was
of the finest cambric, edged with right Mechlin: the knees of his
crimson velvet breeches scarce descended so low as to meet his silk
stockings, which rose without spot or wrinkle on his meagre legs, from
shoes of blue Meroquin, studded with diamond buckles that flamed forth
rivals to the sun! A steel-hilted sword, inlaid with gold, and decked
with a knot of ribbon which fell down in a rich tassel, equipped his
side; and an amber-headed cane hung dangling from his wrist. But the
most remarkable parts of his furniture were, a mask on his face, and
white gloves on his hands, which did not seem to be put on with an
intention to be pulled off occasionally, but were fixed with a curious
ring on the little finger of each hand.

In this garb, Captain Whiffle, for that was his name, took possession
of the ship, surrounded with a crowd of attendants, all of whom, in
their different degrees, seemed to be of their patron’s disposition;
and the air was so impregnated with perfumes, that one may venture to
affirm the climate of Arabia Felix was not half so sweet-scented. My
fellow-mate, observing no surgeon among his train, thought he had found
an occasion too favourable for himself to be neglected; and,
remembering the old proverb, “Spare to speak, and spare to speed,”
resolved to solicit the new captain’s interest immediately, before any
other surgeon could be appointed for the ship. With this view he
repaired to the cabin in his ordinary dress, consisting of a check
shirt and trousers, a brown linen waistcoat, and a nightcap of the same
(neither of them very clean,) which, for his further misfortune,
happened to smell strong of tobacco. Entering without any ceremony into
this sacred place, he found Captain Whiffle reposing upon a couch, with
a wrapper of fine chintz about his body, and a muslin cap bordered with
lace about his head; and after several low congees began in this
manner: “Sir, I hope you will forgive, and excuse, and pardon, the
presumption of one who has not the honour of being known to you, but
who is, nevertheless a shentleman porn and pred, and moreover has had
misfortunes, Cot help me, in the world.”

Here he was interrupted by the captain, who, on seeing him, had started
up with great amazement, at the novelty of the apparition; and, having
recollected himself, pronounced with a look and tone signifying
disdain, curiosity and surprise, “Zauns! who art thou?” “I am surgeon’s
first mate on board of this ship,” replied Morgan: “and I most
vehemently desire and beseech you, with all submission, to be pleased
to condescend and vouchsafe to inquire into my character, and my
pehaviour, and my deserts, which, under Cot, I hope, will entitle me to
the vacancy of surgeon.” As he proceeded in his speech, he continued
advancing towards the captain, whose nostrils were no sooner saluted
with the aromatic flavour that exhaled from him, than he cried with
great emotion, “Heaven preserve me! I am suffocated! Fellow, fellow,
away with thee! Curse thee, fellow! Get thee gone! I shall be stunk to
death!” At the noise of his outcries, his servants ran into his
apartment, and he accosted them thus: “Villains! cut-throats! traitors!
I am betrayed! I am sacrificed! Will you not carry that monster away?
or must I be stifled with the stench of him? oh, oh!” With these
interjections he sank down upon his settee in a fit: his
valet-de-chambre plied him with a smelling-bottle, one footman chafed
his temples with Hungary water, another sprinkled the floor with
spirits of lavender, a third pushed Morgan out of the cabin; who coming
to the place where I was, sat down with a demure countenance and,
according to his custom, when he received any indignity which he durst
not revenge, began to sing a Welsh ditty.

I guessed he was under some agitation of spirits and desired to know
the cause; but, instead of answering me directly, he asked with great
emotion, if I thought him a monster and a stinkard? “A monster and a
stinkard!” said I, with some surprise: “did anybody call you so?” “Cot
is my judge,” replied be, “Captain Fifle did call me both; ay, and all
the waters in the Tawy will not wash it out of my remembrance. I do
affirm and avouch, and maintain, with my soul, and my pody, and my
plood, look you, that I have no smells apout me, but such as a
Christian ought to have, except the effluvia of tobacco, which is a
cephalic, odoriferous, aromatic herb; and he is a son of a mountain
goat who says otherwise. As for my being a minister, let that be as it
is: I am as Cot was pleased to create me, which, peradventure, is more
than I shall ever aver of him who gave me that title; for I will
proclaim it before the world, that he is disguised, and transfigured,
and transmogrified, with affectation and whimseys; and that he is more
like a papoon than of the human race.”




CHAPTER XXXV


Captain Whiffle sends for me—his situation described—his surgeon
arrives, prescribes for him, and puts him to bed—a bed is put up for
Mr. Simper contiguous to the state room, which, with other parts of the
captains behaviour, gives the ship’s company a very unfavourable idea
of their commander—I am detained in the West Indies by the admiral, and
go on board of the Lizard sloop of war in quality of surgeon’s mate,
where I make myself known to the surgeon, who treats me very kindly—I
go on shore, sell my ticket, purchase necessaries, and, at my return on
board, am surprised at the sight of Crampley, who is appointed
lieutenant of the sloop—we sail on a cruise—take a prize in which I
arrive at Port Morant under the command of my messmate, with whom I
live in great harmony


He was going on with an eulogium upon the captain, when I received a
message to clean myself, and go up to the great cabin: and with this
command I instantly complied, sweetening myself with rosewater from the
medicine chest. When I entered the room, I was ordered to stand by the
door, until Captain Whiffle had reconnoitered me at a distance with a
spy-glass. He, having consulted one sense in this manner, bade me
advance gradually, that his nose might have intelligence before it
could be much offended: I therefore approached with great caution and
success, and he was pleased to say, “Ay, this creature is tolerable.” I
found him lolling on his couch with a languishing air, his head
supported by his valet-de-chambre, who from time to time applied a
smelling-bottle to his nose. “Vergette,” said he in a squeaking tone,
“dost think this wretch (meaning me) will do me no injury? May I
venture to submit my arm to him?” “Pon my word,” replied the valet, “I
do tink dat dere be great occasion for your honour losing a small
quantite of blodt; and the young man ave quelque chose of de bonne
mine.” “Well, then,” said his master, “I think I must venture.” Then,
addressing himself to me, “Hast thou ever blooded anybody but brutes?
But I need not ask thee, for thou wilt tell me a most d—able lie,”
“Brutes, sir!” answered I, pulling down his glove, in order to feel his
pulse, “I never meddle with brutes.” “What the devil art thou about?”
cried he, “dost thou intend to twist off my hand? Gad’s curse! my arm
is benumbed up to the very shoulder! Heaven have mercy upon me! must I
perish under the hands of savages? What an unfortunate dog was I to
come on board without my own surgeon, Mr. Simper.” I craved pardon for
having handled him so roughly, and, with the utmost care, and
tenderness, tied up his arm with a fillet of silk. While I was feeling
for the vein, he desired to know how much blood I intended to take from
him, and, when I answered, “not above twelve ounces,” started up with a
look full of horror, and bade me be gone, swearing I had a design upon
his life. Vergette appeased him with difficulty, and, opening a bureau,
took out a pair of scales, in one of which was placed a small cup; and
putting them into my hand, told me, the captain never lost above an
ounce and three drams at one time.

While I prepared for this important evacuation, there came into the
cabin a young man gaily dressed, of a very delicate complexion with a
kind of languid smile on his face: which seemed to have been rendered
habitual by a long course of affectation. The captain no sooner
perceived him, than, rising hastily, he flew into his arms, crying, “O,
my dear Simper, I am excessively disordered! I have been betrayed,
frighted, murdered, by the negligence of my servants, who suffered a
beast, a mule, a bear, to surprise me, and stink me into convulsions
with the fumes of tobacco.” Simper, who by this time, I found, was
obliged to act for the clearness of his complexion, assumed an air of
softness and sympathy, and lamented with many tender expressions of
sorrow, the sad accident that had thrown him into that condition; then,
feeling his patient’s pulse on the outside of his glove, gave it as his
opinion, that his disorder was entirely nervous, and that some drops of
tincture of castor, and liquid laudanum, would be of more service to
him than bleeding, by bridling the inordinate sallies of his spirits,
and composing the fermentation of his bile. I was therefore sent to
prepare this prescription, which was administered in a glass of sack
posset, after the captain had been put to bed, and orders sent to the
officers on the quarter-deck, to let nobody walk on that side under
which he lay.

While the captain enjoyed his repose the doctor watched over him, and
indeed became so necessary, that a cabin was made for him contiguous to
the state room where Whiffle slept, that he might be at hand in case of
accidents in the night. Next day, our commander being happily
recovered, gave orders that none of the lieutenants should appear upon
deck without a wig, sword, and ruffles; nor any midshipman, or other
petty officer, be seen with a check shirt or dirty linen. He also
prohibited any person whatever, except Simper and his own servants,
from coming into the great cabin without first sending in to obtain
leave. These singular regulations did not prepossess the ship’s company
in his favour: but, on the contrary, gave scandal an opportunity to be
very busy with his character, and accuse him of maintaining a
correspondence with his surgeon not fit to be named.

In a few weeks, our ship being under sailing orders, I was in hope of
revisiting my native country, in a very short time, when the admiral’s
surgeon came on board, and, sending for Morgan and me to the
quarter-deck, gave us to understand there was a great scarcity of
surgeons in the West Indies; that he was commanded to detain one mate
out of every great ship that was bound for England; and desired us to
agree between ourselves, before the next day at that hour, which of us
should stay behind. We were thunderstruck at this proposal, and stared
at one another some time without speaking; at length the Welshman broke
silence, and offered to remain in the West Indies, provided the admiral
would give him a surgeon’s warrant immediately; but he was told there
was no want of chief surgeons, and that he must be contented with the
station of mate, till he should be further provided for in due course.
Whereupon Morgan flatly refused to quit the ship for which the
commissioners of the navy had appointed him; and the other told him as
plainly, that if we could not determine the affair by ourselves before
to-morrow morning, he must cast lots, and abide by his chance.

When I recalled to my remembrance the miseries I had undergone in
England, where I had not one friend to promote my interest, or favour
my advancement in the navy, and the same time reflected on the present
dearth of surgeons in the West Indies, and the unhealthiness of the
climate, which every day almost reduced the number, I could not help
thinking my success would be much more certain and expeditious by my
staying where I was, than by returning to Europe. I therefore resolved
to comply with a good grace, and next day, when we were ordered to
throw dice, told Morgan he needed not trouble himself, for I would
voluntarily submit to the admiral’s pleasure. This frank declaration
was commended by the gentleman, who assured me, it should not fare the
worse with me for my resignation. Indeed he was as good as his word,
and that very afternoon procured a warrant, appointing me surgeon’s
mate of the Lizard sloop-of-war, which put me on a footing with every
first mate in the service.

My ticket being made out, I put my chest and bedding on board a canoe
that lay alongside, and, having shook hands with my trusty friend the
sergeant, and honest Jack Rattlin, who was bound for Greenwich
Hospital, I took my leave of Morgan with many tears, after we had
exchanged our sleeve buttons as remembrances of each other. Having
presented my new warrant to the captain of the Lizard, I inquired for
the doctor, whom I no sooner saw than I recollected him to be one of
those young fellows with whom I had been committed to the round-house,
during our frolic with Jackson, as I have related before. He received
me with a good deal of courtesy, and, when I put him in mind of our
former acquaintance, expressed great joy at seeing me again, and
recommended me to an exceeding good mess, composed of the gunner and
master’s mate. As there was not one sick person in the ship, I got
leave to go ashore next day with the gunner, who recommended me to a
Jew, that bought my ticket at the rate of forty per cent discount; and,
having furnished myself with the necessaries I wanted, returned on
board in the evening, and, to my surprise, found my old antagonist
Crampley walking upon deck. Though I did not fear his enmity, I was
shocked at his appearance, and communicated my sentiments on that
subject to Mr. Tomlins the surgeon, who told me that Crampley, by dint
of some friends about the admiral, had procured a commission,
constituting him lieutenant on board the Lizard; and advised me, now he
was my superior officer, to behave with some respect towards him, or
else he would find a thousand opportunities of using me ill. This
advice was a bitter potion to me, whom pride and resentment had
rendered utterly incapable of the least submission to, or even of a
reconciliation with, the wretch who had, on many occasions, treated me
so inhumanly: however, I resolved to have as little connection as
possible with him, and to ingratiate myself as much as I could with the
rest of the officers, whose friendship might be a bulwark to defend me
from the attempts of his malice.

In less than a week we sailed on a cruise, and having weathered the
east end of the island, had the good fortune to take a Spanish
barcolongo, with her prize, which was an English ship bound for
Bristol, that sailed from Jamaica a fortnight before, without convoy.
All the prisoners who were well, we put onshore on the north side of
the island; the prizes were manned with Englishmen, and the command of
the barcolongo given to my friend the master’s mate, with orders to
carry them into Port Morant, and there to remain until the Lizard’s
cruise should be ended, at which time she would touch at the same place
in her way to Port Royal. With him I was sent to attend the wounded
Spaniards as well as Englishmen, who amounted to sixteen, and to take
care of them on shore in a house that was to be hired as an hospital.
This destination gave me a great deal of pleasure, as I should, for
some time, be freed from the arrogance of Crampley, whose inveteracy
against me had already broken out on two or three occasions since he
was become a lieutenant. My messmate, who very much resembled my uncle,
both in figure and disposition, treated me on board of the prize with
the utmost civility and confidence: and, among other favours, made me a
present of a silver-hilted hanger, and a pair of pistols mounted with
the same metal, which fell to his share in plundering the enemy. We
arrived safely at Morant, and, going on shore, pitched upon an empty
storehouse; which we hired for the reception of the wounded, who were
brought to it next day, with beds and other necessaries; and four of
the ship’s company appointed to attend them and obey me.




CHAPTER XXXVI


A strange adventure—in consequence of which I am extremely
happy—Crampley does me in offices with the Captain; but his malice is
defeated by the good-nature and friendship of the surgeon—we return to
Port Royal—our Captain gets the command of a larger ship, and is
succeeded by an old man—Brayl is provided for—we receive orders to sail
for England


When my patients were all in a fair way, my companion and commander,
whose name was Brayl, carried me up the country to the house of a rich
planter, with whom he was acquainted, where we were sumptuously
entertained, and in the evening set out on our return to the ship. When
we had walked about a mile by moonlight, we perceived a horseman behind
us, who coming up, wished us good even, and asked which way we went?
His voice, which was quite familiar to me, no sooner struck my ear,
than in spite of all my resolution and reflection, my hair bristled up,
and I was seized with a violent fit of trembling, which Brayl
misinterpreting, bade me be under no concern. I told him he was
mistaken in the cause of my disorder; and, addressing myself to the
person on horseback said, “I could have sworn by your voice, that you
were a dear friend of mine, if I had not been certain of his death.” To
this address, after some pause, he replied, “There are many voices as
well as faces that resemble one another; but, pray, what was your
friend’s name.” I satisfied him in that particular, and gave a short
detail of the melancholy fate of Thompson, not without many sighs and
some tears. A silence ensued, which lasted some minutes, and then the
conversation turned on different subjects, till we arrived at a house
on the road, where the horseman alighted, and begged with so much
earnestness that we would go in and drink a bowl of punch with him,
that we could not resist. But, if I was alarmed at his voice, what must
my amazement be, when I discovered by the light the very person of my
lamented friend! Perceiving my confusion, which was extreme, he clasped
me in his arms, and bedewed my face with tears. It was some time ere I
recovered the use of my reason, overpowered with this event, and longer
still before I could speak. So that all I was capable of was to return
his embraces, and to mingle the overflowings of my joy with his; whilst
honest Brayl, affected with the scene, wept as fast as either of us,
and signified his participation of our happiness by hugging us both,
and capering about the room like a madman. At length, I retrieved the
use of my tongue, and cried, “Is it possible! you can be my friend
Thompson? No certainly, alas! he was drowned; and I am now under the
deception of a dream!” He was at great pains to convince me of his
being the individual person whom I regretted, and bidding me sit down
and compose myself, promised to explain his sudden disappearance from
the Thunder, and to account for his being at present in the land of the
living. This task he acquitted himself of, after I had drunk a glass of
punch, and recollected my spirits, by informing us, that with a
determination to rid himself of a miserable existence, he had gone in
the night-time to the head, while the ship was on her way, from whence
he slipped down as softly as he could, by the bows into the sea, where,
after he was heartily ducked, he began to repent of his precipitation;
and, as he could swim very well, kept himself above water, in hopes of
being taken up by some of the ships astern; that, in this situation, he
hailed a large vessel, and begged to be taken in, but was answered that
she was a heavy sailer, and therefore they did not choose to lose time
by bringing to; however, they threw an old chest overboard for his
convenience, and told him, that some of the ships astern would
certainly save him; that no other vessel came within sight or cry of
him for the space of three hours, during which time he had the
mortification to find himself in the middle of the ocean alone, without
other support or resting-place, but what a few crazy boards afforded;
till at last he discerned a small sloop steering towards him, upon
which he set up his throat, and had the good fortune to be heard and
rescued from the dreary waste by their boat, which was hoisted out on
purpose.

“I was no sooner brought on board,” continued he, “than I fainted, and,
when I recovered my senses, found myself in bed, regaled with a most
noisome smell of onions and cheese, which made me think at first that I
was in my own hammock, alongside of honest Morgan, and that all which
had passed was no more than a dream. Upon inquiry, I understood that I
was on board of a schooner belonging to Rhode Island, bound for
Jamaica, with a cargo of geese, pigs, onions, and cheese, and that the
master’s name was Robertson, by birth a North Briton, whom I knew at
first sight to be an old school-fellow of mine. When I discovered
myself to him, he was transported with surprise and joy, and begged to
know the occasion of my misfortune, which I did not think fit to
disclose, because I knew his notions with regard to religion were very
severe and confined; therefore contented myself with telling him I fell
overboard by accident; but made no scruple of explaining the nature of
my disagreeable station, and of acquainting him with my determined
purpose never to return to the Thunder man-of-war. Although he was not
of my opinion in that particular, knowing that I must lose my clothes
and what pay was due to me, unless I went back to my duty; yet, when I
described the circumstances of the hellish life I led under the
tyrannic sway of Oakum and Mackshane; and, among other grievances,
hinted a dissatisfaction at the irreligious deportment of my shipmates,
and the want of the true presbyterian gospel doctrine; he changed his
sentiments, and conjured me with great vehemence and zeal to lay aside
all thought of rising in the navy; and, that he might show how much he
had my interest at heart, undertook to provide for me in some shape or
other, before he should leave Jamaica. This promise he performed to my
heart’s desire, by recommending me to a gentleman of fortune, with whom
I have lived ever since in quality of surgeon and overseer to his
plantations. He and his lady are now at Kingston, so that I am, for the
present, master of this house, to which, from my soul, I bid you
welcome, and hope you will favour me with your company during the
remaining part of the night.”

I needed not a second invitation; but Mr. Brayl, who was a diligent and
excellent officer, could not be persuaded to sleep out of the ship;
however, he supped with us, and, after having drank a cheerful glass,
set out for the vessel, which was not above three miles from the place,
escorted by a couple of stout negroes, whom Mr. Thompson ordered to
conduct him. Never were two friends more happy in the conversation of
each other than we, for the time it lasted. I related to him the
particulars of our attempt upon Carthagena, of which he had heard but
an imperfect account; and he gratified me with a narration of every
little incident of his life since we parted. He assured me, it was with
the utmost difficulty he could resist his inclination of coming down to
Port Royal, to see Morgan and me, of whom he had heard no tidings since
the day of our separation: but that he was restrained by the fear of
being detained as a deserter. He told me that, when he heard my voice
in the dark, he was almost as much surprised as I was at seeing him
afterwards: and, in the confidence of friendship, disclosed a passion
he entertained for the only daughter of the gentleman with whom he
lived, who, by his description, was a very amiable young lady, and did
not disdain his addresses; that he was very much favoured by her
parents; and did not despair of obtaining their consent to the match,
which would at once render him independent of the world. I
congratulated him on his good fortune, which he protested should never
make him forget his friends; and, towards morning, we betook ourselves
to rest.

Next day he accompanied me to the ship, where Mr. Brayl entertained him
at dinner, and we having spent the afternoon together, he took his
leave of us in the evening, after he had forced upon me ten pistoles,
as a small token of his affection. In short, while he stayed here, we
saw one another every day, and generally ate at the same table, which
was plentifully supplied by him with all kinds of poultry, butcher’s
meat, oranges, limes, lemons, pine-apples, Madeira wine, and excellent
rum; so that this small interval of ten days was by far the most
agreeable period of my life.

At length the Lizard arrived; and my patients being all fit for duty,
they and I were ordered on board of her, where I understood from Mr.
Tomlins that there was a shyness between the lieutenant and him on my
account; the rancorous villain having taken the opportunity of my
absence to fill the captain’s ears with a thousand scandalous stories
to my prejudice; among other things affirming, that I had been once
transported for theft, and that when I was in the Thunder man-of-war, I
had been whipped for the same crime. The surgeon, on the other hand,
having heard my whole story from my own mouth, defended me strenuously,
and in the course of that good-natured office recounted all the
instances of Crampley’s malice against me while I remained on board of
that ship; which declaration, while it satisfied the captain of my
innocence, made the lieutenant as much my defender’s enemy as mine. The
infernal behaviour of Crampley, with regard to me, added such fuel to
his former resentment, that, at certain times, I was quite beside
myself with the desire of revenge, and was even tempted to pistol him
on the quarter-deck, though an infamous death must inevitably have been
my reward. But the surgeon, who was my confidant, argued against such a
desperate action so effectually, that I stifled the flame which
consumed me for the present, and resolved to wait for a more convenient
opportunity. In the meantime, that Mr. Tomlins might be the more
convinced of the wrongs I suffered by this fellow’s slander, I begged
he would go and visit Mr. Thompson, whose wonderful escape I had made
him acquainted with, and inquire of him into the particulars of my
conduct, while he was my fellow-mate.

This request the surgeon complied with, more through curiosity to see a
person whose fate had been so extraordinary, than to confirm his good
opinion of me, which he assured me was already firmly established. He
therefore set out for the dwelling-place of my friend, with a letter of
introduction from me; and being received with all the civility and
kindness I expected, returned to the ship, not only satisfied with my
character beyond the power of doubt or insinuation, but also charmed
with the affability and conversation of Thompson, who loaded him and me
with presents of fresh stock, liquors, and fruit. As he would not
venture to come and see us on board, lest Cramplay should know and
detain him; when the time of our departure approached, I obtained leave
to go and bid him farewell. After we had vowed an everlasting
friendship, he pressed upon me a purse, with four doubloons, which I
refused as long as I could without giving umbrage; and, having
cordially embraced each other, I returned on board, where I found a
small box, with a letter directed for me, to the care of Mr. Tomlins.
Knowing the superscription to be of Thompson’s handwriting, I opened it
with some surprise, and learned that this generous friend, not content
with loading me with the presents already mentioned, had sent, for my
use and acceptance, half a dozen fine shirts, and as many linen
waistcoats and caps, with twelve pair of new thread stockings. Being
thus provided with money and all necessaries for the comfort of life, I
began to look upon myself as a gentleman of some consequence, and felt
my pride dilate a pace.

Next day we sailed for Port Royal, where we arrived safely with our
prizes; and, as there was nothing to do on board, I went ashore, and
having purchased a laced waistcoat, with some other clothes, at a sale,
made a swaggering figure for some days among the taverns, where I
ventured to play a little at hazard, and came off with fifty pistoles
in my pocket. Meanwhile our captain was promoted to a ship of twenty
guns, and the command of the Lizard given to a man turned of fourscore,
who had been lieutenant since the reign of King William, and,
notwithstanding his long service, would have probably died in that
station, had he not applied some prize-money he had lately received, to
make interest with his superiors. My friend Brayl was also made an
officer about the same time, after he had served in quality of a
midshipman and mate for five and twenty years. Soon after these
alterations, the admiral pitched upon our ship to carry home dispatches
for the ministry; and we set sail for England, having first scrubbed
her bottom, and taken in provision and water for the occasion.




CHAPTER XXXVII


We depart for Europe—a misunderstanding arises between the Captain and
the Surgeon, through the scandalous aspersions of Crampley—the Captain
dies—Crampley tyrannises over the surgeon, who falls a Victim for his
Cruelty—I am also ill-used—the Ship strikes—the behaviour of Crampley
and the Seamen on that occasion—-I get on shore, challenge the Captain
to single combat—am treacherously knocked down, wounded, and robbed


Now that I could return to my native country in a creditable way, I
felt excessive pleasure in finding myself out of sight of that fatal
island, which has been the grave of so many Europeans: and, as I was
accommodated with everything to make the passage agreeable, I resolved
to enjoy myself as much as the insolence of Crampley would permit. This
insidious slanderer had found means already to cause a misunderstanding
between the surgeon and captain, who, by his age and infirmities, was
rendered intolerably peevish, his disposition having also been soured
by a long course of disappointments. He had a particular aversion to
all young men, especially to surgeons, whom he considered unnecessary
animals on board of a ship; and, in consequence of these sentiments,
never consulted the doctor, notwithstanding his being seized with a
violent fit of the gout and gravel, but applied to a cask of Holland
gin, which was his sovereign prescription against all distempers:
whether he was at this time too sparing, or took an overdose of his
cordial, certain it is, he departed in the night, without any ceremony,
which indeed was a thing he always despised, and was found stiff next
morning, to the no small satisfaction of Crampley, who succeeded to the
command of the vessel. For that very reason, Mr. Tomlins and I had no
cause to rejoice at this event, fearing that the tyranny of our new
commander would now be as unlimited as his power. The first day of his
command justified our apprehensions: for, on pretence that the decks
were too much crowded, he ordered the surgeon’s hencoops, with all his
fowls, to be thrown overboard; and at the same time prohibited him and
me from walking on the quarter-deck.

Mr. Tomlins could not help complaining of these injuries, and in the
course of his expostulation dropped some hasty words, of which Crampley
taking hold, confined him to his cabin, where, in a few days, for want
of air he was attacked by a fever, which soon put an end to his life,
after he had made his will, by which he bequeathed all his estate,
personal and real, to his sister, and left to me his watch and
instruments as memorials of his friendship. I was penetrated with grief
on this melancholy occasion; the more because there was nobody on board
to whom I could communicate my sorrows, or of whom I could receive the
least consolation or advice. Crampley was so far from discovering the
least remorse for his barbarity, at the news of the surgeon’s death,
that he insulted his memory in the most abusive manner, and affirmed he
had poisoned himself out of pure fear, dreading to be brought to a
court-martial for mutiny; for which reason he would not suffer the
service of the dead to be read over his body before it was thrown
overboard.

Nothing but a speedy deliverance could have supported me under the
brutal sway of this bashaw, who, to render my life more irksome,
signified to my messmates a desire that I should be expelled from their
society. This was no sooner hinted, than they granted his request; and
I was fain to eat in a solitary manner by myself during the rest of the
passage, which, however, soon drew to a period.

We had been seven weeks at sea, when the gunner told the captain that,
by his reckoning, we must be in soundings, and desired he would order
the lead to be heaved. Crampley swore he did not know how to keep the
ship’s way, for we were not within a hundred leagues of soundings, and
therefore he would not give himself the trouble to cast the lead.
Accordingly we continued our course all that afternoon and night,
without shortening sail, although the gunner pretended to discover
Scilly light; and next morning protested in form against the captain’s
conduct, for which he was put in confinement, We discovered no land all
that day, and Crampley was still so infatuated as to neglect sounding;
but at three o’clock in the morning the ship struck, and remained fast
on a sand-bank. This accident alarmed the whole crew; the boat was
immediately hoisted out, but as we could not discern which way the
shore lay, we were obliged to wait for daylight. In the meantime, the
wind increased, and the waves beat against the sloop with such
violence, that we expected she would have gone to pieces. The gunner
was released and consulted: he advised the captain to cut away the
mast, in order to lighten her; this expedient was performed without
success: the sailors, seeing things in a desperate situation, according
to custom, broke up the chests belonging to the officers, dressed
themselves in their clothes, drank their liquors without ceremony, and
drunkenness, tumult, and confusion ensued.

In the midst of this uproar, I went below to secure my own effects, and
found the carpenter’s mate hewing down the purser’s cabin with his
hatchet, whistling all the while with great composure. When I asked his
intention in so doing, he replied, very calmly, “I only want to taste
the purser’s rum, that’s all, master.” At that instant the purser
coming down, and seeing his effects going to wreck, complained bitterly
of the injustice done to him, and asked the fellow what occasion he had
for liquor when, in all likelihood, he would be in eternity in a few
minutes. “All’s one for that,” said plunderer, “let us live while we
can.” “Miserable wretch that thou art!” cried the purser, “what must be
thy lot in another world, if thou diest in the commission of robbery?”
“Why, hell, I suppose,” replied the other, with great deliberation,
while the purser fell on his knees, and begged of Heaven that we might
not all perish for the sake of Jonas.

During this dialogue I clothed myself in my bed apparel, girded on my
hanger, stuck my pistols, loaded, in my belt, disposed of all my
valuable moveables about my person, and came upon deck with a
resolution of taking the first opportunity to get on shore, which, when
the day broke, appeared at the distance of three miles ahead. Crampley,
finding his efforts to get the ship off ineffectual, determined to
consult his own safety, by going into the boat, which he had no sooner
done, than the ship’s company followed so fast, that she would have
sunk alongside, had not some one wiser than the rest cut the rope and
put off. But before this happened, I had made several attempts to get
in, and was always balked by the captain, who was so eager in excluding
me, that he did not mind the endeavours of any other body. Enraged at
this inhuman partiality, and seeing the rope cut, I pulled one of my
pistols from my belt, and cocking it, swore I would shoot any man who
would presume to obstruct my entrance. So saying, I leaped with my full
exertion, and got on board of the boat with the loss of the skin of my
shins. I chanced in my descent to overturn Crampley, who no sooner got
up than he struck at me several times with a cutlass, and ordered the
men to throw me overboard; but they were too anxious about their own
safety to mind what he said. Though the boat was very deeply loaded,
and the sea terribly high, we made shift to get upon dry land in less
than an hour after we parted from the sloop. As soon as I set my foot
on terra firma, my indignation, which had boiled so long within me,
broke out against Crampley, whom I immediately challenged to single
combat, presenting my pistols, that he might take his choice: he took
one without hesitation, and, before I could cock the other, fired in my
face, throwing the pistol after the shot. I felt myself stunned, and
imagining the bullet had entered my brain, discharged mine as quick as
possible, that I might not die unrevenged: then flying upon my
antagonist, knocked out several of his fore-teeth with the butt-end of
the piece, and would certainly have made an end of him with that
instrument, had he not disengaged himself, and seized his cutlass,
which he had given to his servant when he received the pistol. Seeing
him armed in this manner, I drew my hanger, and, having flung my pistol
at his head, closed with him in a transport of fury, and thrust my
weapon into his mouth, which it enlarged on one side to his ear.
Whether the smart of this wound disconcerted him, or the unevenness of
the ground made him reel, I know not, but he staggered some paces back:
I followed close, and with one stroke cut the tendons of the back of
his hand, Upon which his cutlass dropped, and he remained defenceless.
I know not with what cruelty my rage might have inspired me, if I had
not at that instant been felled to the ground by a blow on the back
part of my head, which deprived me of all sensation. In this deplorable
situation, exposed to the rage of an incensed barbarian, and the rapine
of an inhuman crew, I remained for some time; and whether any disputes
arose among them during the state of my annihilation, I cannot pretend
to determine; but in one particular they seemed to have been unanimous,
and acted with equal dexterity and dispatch; for when I recovered the
use of my understanding, I found myself alone in a desolate place,
stripped of my clothes, money, watch, buckles, and everything but my
shoes, stockings, breeches and shirt. What a discovery must this have
been to me, who, but an hour before, was worth sixty guineas in cash! I
cursed the hour of my birth, the parents that gave me being, the sea
that did not swallow me up, the poniard of the enemy, which could not
find the way to my heart, the villainy of those who had left me in that
miserable condition; and in the ecstacy of despair resolved to be still
where I was, and perish.




CHAPTER XXXVIII


I get up and crawl into a barn, where I am in danger of perishing,
through the fear of the country people—their inhumanity—I am succoured
by a reputed witch—her story—her advice—she recommends me as a valet to
a single lady, whose character she explains


But as I lay ruminating, my passion insensibly abated; I considered my
situation in quite another light, from that in which it appeared to me
at first, and the result of my deliberation was to rise if I could, and
crawl to the next inhabited place for assistance. With some difficulty
I got upon my legs, and having examined my body, found I had received
no other injury than two large contused wounds, one on the fore and
another on the hinder part of my head, which seemed to be occasioned by
the same weapon, namely, the butt-end of a pistol. I looked towards the
sea, but could discern no remains of the ship; so that I concluded she
was gone to pieces, and that those who remained in her had perished:
but, as I afterwards learned, the gunner, who had more sagacity than
Crampley, observing that it was flood when he left her, and that she
would probably float at high water, made no noise about getting on
shore, but continued on deck, in hopes of bringing her safe into some
harbour, after her commander should have deserted her, for which piece
of service he expected, no doubt, to be handsomely rewarded. This
scheme he accordingly executed, and was promised great things by the
Admiralty for saving his Majesty’s ship: but I never heard he reaped
the fruits of his expectation. As for my own part, I directed my course
towards a small cottage I perceived, and in the road picked up a
seaman’s old jacket, which I suppose the thief who dressed himself in
my clothes had thrown away: this was a very comfortable acquisition to
me, who was almost stiff with cold: I therefore put it on; and, as my
natural heat revived, my wounds, which had left off bleeding, burst out
afresh; so that, finding myself excessively exhausted, I was about to
lie down in the fields, when I discovered a barn on my left hand,
within a few yards of me; thither I made shift to stagger, and finding
the door open, went in, but saw nobody; however, I threw myself upon a
truss of straw, hoping to be soon relieved by some person or other. I
had not lain here many minutes, when I saw a countryman come in with a
pitchfork in his hand, which he was upon the point of thrusting into
the straw that concealed me, and in all probability would have done my
business, had I not uttered a dreadful groan, after having essayed in
vain to speak. This melancholy note alarmed the clown, who started
back, and discovering a body all besmeared with blood, stood trembling,
with the pitchfork extended before him, his hair bristling up, his eyes
staring, his nostrils dilated, and his mouth wide open. At another time
I should have been much diverted by this figure, which preserved the
same attitude very near ten minutes, during which time I made many
unsuccessful efforts to implore his compassion and assistance; but my
tongue failed me, and my language was only a repetition of groans. At
length an old man arrived, who, seeing the other in such a posture,
cried, “Mercy upon en! the leaad’s bewitched! why, Dick, beest thou
besayd thyself!” Dick, without moving his eyes from the object that
terrified him, replied, “O vather! vather! here be either the devil or
a dead mon: I doant know which o’en, but a groans woundily.” The
father, whose eyesight was none of the best, pulled out his spectacles,
and, having applied them to his nose reconnoitered me over his son’s
shoulder: but no sooner did he behold me, than he was seized with a fit
of shaking, even more violent than Dick’s, and, with a broken accent,
addressed me thus: “In the name of the Vather, Zun, and Holy Ghost, I
charge you, an you been Satan, to be gone to the Red Zen; but an you be
a moordered mon, speak, that you may have a Christom burial.”

As I was not in a condition to satisfy him in this particular, he
repeated his conjuration to no purpose, and they continued a good while
in the agonies of fear. At length the father proposed that the son
should draw nearer, and take a more distinct view of the apparition;
but Dick was of opinion that his father should advance first, he being
an old man past his labour and, if he received any mischief, the loss
would be the smaller; whereas he himself might escape, and be useful,
in his generation. This prudential reason had no effect upon the
senior, who still kept Dick between me and him. In the meantime I
endeavoured to raise one hand as a signal of distress, but had only
strength sufficient to produce a rustling among the straw, which
discomposed the young peasant so much, that he sprang out at the door,
and overthrew his father in his flight. The old gentleman would not
spend time in getting up, but crawled backwards like a crab, with great
speed, till he had got over the threshold, mumbling exorcisms all the
way. I was exceedingly mortified to find myself in danger of perishing
through the ignorance and cowardice of these clowns; and felt my
spirits decay apace, when an old woman entered the barn, followed by
the two fugitives and with great intrepidity advanced to the place
where I lay, saying, “If it be the devil I fearen not, and for a dead
mon a can do us no harm.” When she saw my condition, she cried, “Here
be no devil, but in your en fool’s head. Here be a poor miserable
wretch bleeding to death, and if a dies, we must be at the charge of
burying him; therefore, Dick, go vetch the old wheelbarrow and put en
in, and carry en to goodman Hodge’s backdoor; he is more able than we
to pay out money upon poor vagrants.” Her advice was taken, and
immediately put in execution; I was rolled to the other farmer’s door,
where I was tumbled out like a heap of dung; and should certainly have
fallen a prey to the hogs, if my groans had not disturbed the family,
and brought some of them out to view my situation. But Hodge resembled
the Jew more than the good Samaritan, and ordered me to be carried to
the house of the parson, whose business it was to practise as well as
to preach charity; observing that it was sufficient for him to pay his
quota towards the maintenance of the poor belonging to his own parish.
When I was set down at the vicar’s gate, he fell into a mighty passion,
and threatened to excommunicate him who sent, as well as those who
brought me, unless they would move me immediately to another place.
About this time I fainted with the fatigue I had undergone, and
afterwards understood that I was bandied from door to door through a
whole village, nobody having humanity enough to administer the least
relief to me, Until an old woman, who was suspected of witchcraft by
the neighbourhood, hearing of my distress, received me into her house,
and, having dressed my wounds, brought me to myself with cordials of
her own preparing. I was treated with great care and tenderness by this
grave matron, who, after I had recovered some strength, desired to know
the particulars of my last disaster. This piece of satisfaction I could
not refuse to one who had saved my life, therefore related all my
adventures without exaggeration or reserve. She seemed surprised at the
vicissitudes I had undergone, and drew a happy presage of my future
life from my past suffering, then launched out into the praise of
adversity, with so much ardour and good sense, that I concluded she was
a person who had seen better days, and conceived a longing desire to
hear her story. She perceived my drift by some words I dropped, and
smiling told me, there was nothing either entertaining or extraordinary
in the course of her fortune; but, however, she would communicate it to
me, in consideration of the confidence I had reposed in her. “It is of
little consequence,” said she, “to tell the names of my parents, who
are dead many years ago; let it suffice to assure you, they were
wealthy, and had no other child than me; so that I was looked upon as
heiress to a considerable estate, and teased with addresses on that
account. Among the number of my admirers, there was a young gentleman
of no fortune, whose sole dependence was on his promotion in the army,
in which, at that time, he bore a lieutenant’s commission. I conceived
an affection for this amiable officer, which, in a short time,
increased to a violent passion, and without entering into minute
circumstances, married him privately. We had not enjoyed one another
long in stolen interviews, when he was ordered with his regiment to
Flanders; but, before he set out, it was agreed between us, that we
should declare our marriage to my father by letter, and implore his
pardon for the step we had taken without his approbation. This
discovery was made while I was abroad visiting, and just as I was about
to return home, I received a letter from my father, importing that,
since I had acted so undutifully and meanly as to marry a beggar,
without his privity or consent, to the disgrace of his family as well
as the disappointment of his hopes, he renounced me to the miserable
fate I had entailed upon myself, and charged me never to set foot
within his doors again. This rigid sentence was confirmed by my mother,
who, in a postscript, gave me to understand that her sentiments were
exactly conformable to those of my father, and that I might save myself
the trouble of making any applications, for her resolutions were
unalterable. Thunderstruck with my evil fortune I called a coach, and
drove to my husband’s lodgings, where I found him waiting the event of
his letter. Though he could easily divine by my looks the issue of his
declaration, he read with great steadiness the epistle I had received;
and with a smile full of tenderness, which I shall never forget,
embraced me, saying, “I believe the good lady your mother might have
spared herself the trouble of the last part of her postscript. Well, my
dear Betty, you must lay aside all thoughts of a coach, till I can
procure the command of a regiment.” This unconcerned behaviour, while
it enabled me to support my reverse of fortune, at the same time
endeared him to me the more, by convincing me of his disinterested
views in espousing me. I was next day boarded in company with the wife
of another officer, who had long been the friend and confidant of my
husband, at a village not far from London, where they parted with us in
the most melting manner, went to Flanders, and were killed in sight of
one another at the battle of the Wood.

“Why should I tire you with a description of our unutterable sorrow at
the fatal news of this event, the remembrance of which now fills my
aged eyes with tears! When our grief subsided a little, and reflection
came to our aid, we found ourselves deserted by the whole world, and in
danger of perishing by want; whereupon we made application for the
pension, and were put upon the list. Then, vowing eternal friendship,
sold our jewels and superfluous clothes, retired to this place (which
is in the county of Sussex) bought this little house, where we lived
many years in a solitary manner, indulging our mutual sorrow, till it
pleased Heaven to call away my companion two years ago; since which
time I have lingered out an unhappy being, in hopes of a speedy
dissolution, when I promise myself the eternal reward of all my cares.
In the meantime,” continued she, “I must inform you of the character I
bear among my neighbours. My conversation being different from that of
the inhabitants of the village, my recluse way of life, my skill in
curing distempers, which I acquired from books since I settled here,
and lastly, my age having made the common people look upon me as
something preternatural, and I am actually, at this hour, believed to
be a witch. The parson of the parish, whose acquaintance I have not
been at much pains to cultivate, taking umbrage at my supposed
disrespect, has contributed not a little towards the confirmation of
this opinion, by dropping certain hints to my prejudice among the
vulgar, who are also very much scandalised at my entertaining this poor
tabby cat with the collar about her neck, which was a favourite of my
deceased companion.”

The whole behaviour of this venerable person was so primitive,
innocent, sensible, and humane, that I contracted a filial respect for
her, and begged her advice with regard to my future conduct, as soon as
I was in a condition to act for myself. She dissuaded me from a design
I had formed of travelling to Louder, in hopes of retrieving my clothes
and pay, by returning to my ship, which by this time I read in the
newspaper was safely arrived in the River Thames: “because,” said she,
“you run the hazard of being treated not only as a deserter in quitting
the sloop, but also as a mutineer, in assaulting your commanding
officer, to the malice of whose revenge you will moreover be exposed.”
She then promised to recommend me, as servant to a single lady of her
acquaintance, who lived in the neighbourhood with her nephew, who was a
young foxhunter of great fortune, where I might be very happy, provided
I could bear with the disposition and manners of my mistress, which
were somewhat whimsical and particular. But, above all things, she
counselled me to conceal my story, the knowledge of which would
effectually poison my entertainment; for it was a maxim, among most
people of condition, that no gentleman ought to be admitted into a
family as a domestic, lest he become lazy, and insolent. I was fain to
embrace this humble proposal, because my affairs were desperate; and in
a few days was hired by this lady, to serve in quality of her footman,
having been represented by my hostess as a young man who was bred up to
the sea by his relations against his will, and had suffered shipwreck,
which had increased his disgust to that way of life so much, that he
rather chose to go to service on shore, than enter himself on board of
any other ship. Before I took possession of my new place, she gave me a
sketch of my mistress’s character, that I might know better how to
regulate my conduct.

“Your lady,” said she, “is a maiden of forty years, not so remarkable
for her beauty as her learning and taste, which is famous all over the
country. Indeed, she is a perfect female virtuoso, and so eager after
the pursuit of knowledge that she neglects her person even to a degree
of sluttishness; this negligence, together with her contempt of the
male part of the creation, gives her nephew no great concern, as by
these means he will probably keep her fortune, which is considerable in
the family. He therefore permits her to live in her own way, which is
something extraordinary, and gratifies her in all her whimsical
desires. Her apartment is at some distance from the other inhabited
parts of the house; and consists of a dining-room, bedchamber, and
study; she keeps a cook maid, a waiting-woman, and footman, of her own,
and seldom eats or converses with any of the family but her niece, who
is a very lovely creature, and humours her aunt often to the prejudice
of her own health by sitting up with her whole nights together; for
your mistress is too much of a philosopher to be swayed by the custom
of the world, and never sleeps nor eats like other people. Among other
odd notions, she professes the principles of Rosicrucius, and believes
the earth, air, and sea, are inhabited by invisible beings, with whom
it is possible for the human species to entertain correspondence and
intimacy, on the easy condition of living chaste. As she hopes one day
to be admitted into an acquaintance of this kind, she no sooner heard
of me and my cat, than she paid me a visit, with a view, as she has
since owned, to be introduced to my familiar; and was greatly mortified
to find herself disappointed in her expectation. Being by this
visionary turn of mind abstracted as it were from the world, she cannot
advert to the common occurrences of life; and therefore is frequently
so absent as to commit very strange mistakes and extravagancies, which
you will do well to rectify and repair, as your prudence shall
suggest.”




CHAPTER XXXIX


My Reception by that Lady—I become enamoured of Narcissa—recount the
particulars of my last misfortune—acquire the good opinion of my
Mistress—an Account of the young Squire—I am made acquainted with more
particulars of Narcissa’s Situation—conceive a mortal hatred against
Sir Timothy—examine my Lady’s library and performances—her extravagant
behaviour


Fraught with these useful instructions, I repaired to the place of her
habitation, and was introduced by the waiting-woman to the presence of
my lady, who had not before seen me. She sat in her study, with one
foot on the ground, and the other upon a high stool at some distance
from her seat; her sandy locks hung down, in a disorder I cannot call
beautiful, from her head, which was deprived of its coif, for the
benefit of scratching with one hand, while she held the stump of a pen
in the other. Her forehead was high and wrinkled; her eyes were large,
gray, and prominent; her nose was long, and aquiline: her mouth of vast
capacity, her visage meagre and freckled, and her chin peaked like a
shoemaker’s paring knife; her upper lip contained a large quantity of
plain Spanish, which, by continual falling, had embroidered her neck,
that was not naturally very white, and the breast of her gown, that
flowed loose about her with a negligence that was truly poetic,
discovering linen that was very fine, and, to all appearance, never
washed but in Castalian streams. Around her lay heaps of books, globes,
quadrants, telescopes, and other learned apparatus; her snuff-box stood
at her right hand: at her left hand lay her handkerchief, sufficiently
used, and a convenience to spit in appeared on one side of her chair.
She being in a reverie when we entered, the maid did not think proper
to disturb her; so that we waited some minutes unobserved, during which
time she bit the quill several times, altered her position, made many
wry faces, and, at length, with an air of triumph, repeated aloud:

“Nor dare th’immortal gods my rage oppose!”


Having committed her success to paper, she turned towards the door, and
perceiving us, cried, “What’s the matter?” “Here’s the young man,”
replied my conductress, “whom Mrs. Sagely recommended as a footman to
your ladyship.” On this information she stared in my face for a
considerable time, and then asked my name, which I thought proper to
conceal under that of John Brown. After having surveyed me with a
curious eye, she broke out into, “O! ay, thou wast shipwrecked, I
remember. Whether didst thou come on shore on the back of a whale or a
dolphin?” To this I answered, I had swam ashore without any assistance.
Then she demanded to know if I had ever been at the Hellespont, and
swam from Sestos to Abydos. I replied in the negative; upon which she
bade the maid order a suit of new livery for me, and instruct me in the
articles of my duty: so she spit in her snuff-box, and wiped her nose
with her cap, which lay on the table, instead of a handkerchief.

We returned to the kitchen, where I was regaled by the maids, who
seemed to vie with each other in expressing their regard for me; and
from them I understood, that my business consisted in cleaning knives
and forks, laying the cloth, waiting at table, carrying messages, and
attending my lady when she went abroad. There was a very good suit of
livery in the house, which had belonged to my predecessor deceased, and
it fitted me exactly; so that there was no occasion for employing a
tailor on my account. I had not been long equipped in this manner, when
my lady’s bell rung; upon which, I ran up stairs, and found her
stalking about the room in her shift and under petticoat only; I would
immediately have retired as became me, but she bade me come in, and air
a clean shift for her; which operation I having performed with some
backwardness, she put it on before me without any ceremony, and I
verily believe was ignorant of my sex all that time, as being quite
absorbed in contemplation. About four o’clock in the afternoon I was
ordered to lay the cloth, and place two covers, which I understood were
for my mistress and her niece, whom I had not as yet seen. Though I was
not very dexterous at this work, I performed it pretty well for a
beginner, and, when dinner was upon the table, saw my mistress
approach, accompanied by the young lady, whose name for the present
shall be Narcissa. So much sweetness appeared in the countenance and
carriage of this amiable apparition, that my heart was captivated at
first sight, and while dinner lasted, I gazed upon her without
intermission. Her age seemed to be seventeen, her stature tall, her
shape unexceptionable, her hair, that fell down upon her ivory neck in
ringlets, black as jet; her arched eyebrows of the same colour; her
eyes piercing, yet tender; her lips of the consistence and hue of
cherries; her complexion clear, delicate and healthy; her aspect noble,
ingenuous, and humane; and the whole person so ravishingly delightful,
that it was impossible for any creature endued with sensibility, to see
without admiring, and admire without loving her to excess. I began to
curse the servile station that placed me so far beneath the regard of
this idol of my adoration! and yet I blessed my fate, that enabled me
to enjoy daily the sight of so much perfection! When she spoke I
listened with pleasure; but when she spoke to me, my soul was thrilled
with an extacy of tumultuous joy. I was even so happy as to be the
subject of their conversation; for Narcissa, having observed me, said
to her aunt, “I see your new footman is come.” Then addressing herself
to me, asked, with ineffable complacency, if I was the person who had
been so cruelly used by robbers? When I had satisfied her in this; she
expressed a desire of knowing the other particulars of my fortune, both
before and since my being shipwrecked: hereupon (as Mrs. Sagely had
counselled me) I told her that I had been bound apprentice to the
master of a ship, contrary to my inclination, which ship had foundered
at sea; that I and four more, who chanced to be on deck when she went
down, made shift to swim to the shore, when my companions, after having
overpowered me, stripped me to the shirt, and left me, as they
imagined, dead of the wounds I received in my own defence. Then I
related the circumstances of being found in a barn, with the inhuman
treatment I met with from the country people and parson; the
description of which, I perceived, drew tears from the charming
creature’s eyes. When I had finished my recital, my mistress, said, “Ma
foi! le garçon est bien fait!” To which opinion Narcissa assented, with
a compliment to my understanding, in the same language, that flattered
my vanity extremely.

The conversation, among other subjects, turned upon the young squire,
whom my lady inquired after under the title of the Savage; and was
informed by her niece that he was still in bed, repairing the fatigue
of last night’s debauch, and recruiting strength and spirits to undergo
a fox chase to-morrow morning, in company with Sir Timothy Thicket,
Squire Bumper, and a great many other gentlemen of the same stamp, whom
he had invited on that occasion! so that by daybreak the whole house
would be in an uproar. This was a very disagreeable piece of news to
the virtuoso, who protested she would stuff her ears with cotton when
she went to bed, and take a dose of opium to make her sleep the more
sound, that she might not be disturbed and distracted by the clamour of
the brutes.

When their dinner was over, I and my fellow servants sat down to ours
in the kitchen, where I understood that Sir Timothy Thicket was a
wealthy knight in the neighbourhood, between whom and Narcissa a match
had been projected by her brother, who promised at the same time to
espouse Sir Timothy’s sister; by which means, as their fortunes were
pretty equal, the young ladies would be provided for, and their
brothers be never the poorer; but that the ladies did not concur in the
scheme, each of them entertaining a hearty contempt for the person
allotted to her for a husband by this agreement. This information begat
in me a mortal aversion to Sir Timothy, whom I looked upon as my rival,
and cursed in my heart for his presumption.

Next morning, by daybreak, being awakened by the noise of the hunters
and hounds, I rose to view the cavalcade, and had a sight of my
competitor, whose accomplishments (the estate excluded) did not seem
brilliant enough to give me much uneasiness with respect to Narcissa,
who, I flattered myself, was not to be won by such qualifications as he
was master of, either as to person or mind. My mistress,
notwithstanding her precaution, was so much disturbed by her nephew’s
company, that she did not rise till five o’clock in the afternoon; so
that I had an opportunity of examining her study at leisure, to which
examination I was strongly prompted by my curiosity. Here I found a
thousand scraps of her own poetry, consisting of three, four, ten,
twelve, and twenty lines, on an infinity of subjects, which, as whim
inspired, she had begun, without constancy or capacity to bring to any
degree of composition: but, what was very extraordinary in a female
poet, there was not the least mention made of love in any of her
performances. I counted fragments of five tragedies, the titles of
which were “The Stern Philosopher,” “The Double,” “The Sacrilegious
Traitor,” “The Fall of Lucifer,” and “The Last Day.” From whence I
gathered, that her disposition was gloomy, and her imagination
delighted with objects of horror. Her library was composed of the best
English historians, poets, and philosophers; of all the French critics
and poets, and of a few books in Italian, chiefly poetry, at the head
of which were Tasso and Ariosto, pretty much used. Besides these,
translations of the classics into French, but not one book in Greek or
Latin; a circumstance that discovered her ignorance in these languages.

After having taken a full view of this collection, I retired, and at
the usual time was preparing to lay the cloth, when I was told by the
maid that her mistress was still in bed, and had been so affected with
the notes of the hounds in the morning, that she actually believed
herself a hare beset by the hunters, and begged a few greens to munch
for breakfast. When I expressed my surprise in this unaccountable
imagination she gave me to understand that her lady was very much
subject to whims of this nature; sometimes fancying herself an animal,
sometimes a piece of furniture, during which conceited transformations
it was very dangerous to come near her, especially when she represented
a beast; for that lately, in the character of a cat, she had flown at
her, and scratched her face in a terrible manner: that some months ago,
she prophesied the general conflagration was at hand, and nothing would
be able to quench it but her water, which therefore she kept so long,
that her life was in danger, and she must needs have died of the
retention, had they not found an expedient to make her evacuate, by
kindling a bonfire under her chamber window and persuading her that the
house was in flames: upon which, with great deliberation, she bade them
bring all the tubs and vessels they could find to be filled for the
preservation of the house, into one of which she immediately discharged
the cause of her distemper. I was also informed that nothing
contributed so much to the recovery of her reason as music, which was
always administered on those occasions by Narcissa, who played
perfectly well on the harpsichord, and to whom she (the maid) was just
then going to intimate her aunt’s disorder.

She was no sooner gone than I was summoned by the bell to my lady’s
chamber, where I found her sitting squat on her hands on the floor, in
the manner of puss when she listens to the outcries of her pursuers.
When I appeared, she started up with an alarmed look, and sprang to the
other side of the room to avoid me, whom, without doubt, she mistook
for a beagle thirsting after her life. Perceiving her extreme
confusion, I retired, and on the staircase met the adorable Narcissa
coming up, to whom I imparted the situation of my mistress; she said
not a word, but smiling with unspeakable grace, went into her aunt’s
apartment, and in a little time my ears were ravished with the efforts
of her skill. She accompanied the instrument with a voice so sweet and
melodious, that I did not wonder at the surprising change it produced
on the spirits of my mistress which composed to peace and sober
reflection.

About seven o’clock, the hunters arrived with the skins of two foxes
and one badger, carried before them as trophies of their success; and
when they were about to sit down to dinner (or supper) Sir Timothy
Thicket desired that Narcissa would honour the table with her presence;
but this request, notwithstanding her brother’s threats and entreaties,
she refused, on pretence of attending her aunt, who was indisposed; so
I enjoyed the satisfaction of seeing my rival mortified: but this
disappointment made no great impression on him, who consoled himself
with the bottle, of which the whole company became so enamoured that,
after a most horrid uproar of laughing, singing, swearing, and
fighting, they were all carried to bed in a state of utter oblivion. My
duty being altogether detached from the squire and his family, I led a
pretty easy and comfortable life, drinking daily intoxicating draughts
of love from the charms of Narcissa, which brightened on my
contemplation every day more and more. Inglorious as my station was, I
became blind to my own unworthiness, and even conceived hopes of one
day enjoying this amiable creature, whose, affability greatly
encouraged these presumptuous thoughts.




CHAPTER XL


My mistress is surprised at my learning—communicates her performances
to me—I impart some of mine to her—am mortified at her faint
praise—Narcissa approves of my conduct—I gain an involuntary conquest
over the cookwench and dairymaid—their mutual resentment and
insinuations—the jealousy of their lovers


During this season of love and tranquillity, my muse, which had lain
dormant so long, awoke, and produced several small performances on the
subject of my flame. But as it concerned me nearly to remain
undiscovered in my character and sentiments, I was under a necessity of
mortifying my desire of praise, by confining my works to my own perusal
and applause. In the meantime I strove to insinuate myself into the
good opinion of both ladies; and succeeded so well, by my diligence and
dutiful behaviour, that in a little time I was at least a favourite
servant; and frequently enjoyed the satisfaction of hearing myself
mentioned in French and Italian, with some degree of warmth and
surprise by the dear object of all my wishes, as a person who had so
much of the gentleman in my appearance and discourse, that she could
not for her soul treat me like a common lacquey. My prudence and
modesty were not long proof against these bewitching compliments. One
day, while I waited at dinner, the conversation turned upon a knotty
passage of Tasso’s Gierusalem, which, it seems, had puzzled them both:
after a great many unsatisfactory conjectures, my mistress, taking the
book out of her pocket, turned up the place in question, and read the
sentence over and over without success; at length, despairing of
finding the author’s meaning, she turned to me, saying, “Come hither,
Bruno; let us see what fortune will do for us: I will interpret to thee
what goes before, and what follows this obscure paragraph, the
particular words of which I will also explain, that thou mayst, by
comparing one with another, guess the sense of that which perplexes
us.” I was too vain to let slip this opportunity of displaying my
talents; therefore, without hesitation, read and explained the whole of
that which had disconcerted them, to the utter astonishment of both.
Narcissa’s face and lovely neck were overspread with blushes, from
which I drew a favourable opinion, while her aunt, after having stared
at me a good while with a look of amazement, exclaimed, “In the name of
heaven who art thou?” I told her I had picked up a smattering of
Italian, during a voyage up the Straits. At this explanation she shook
her head, and observed that no smatterer could read as I had done. She
then desired to know if I understood French. To which question I
answered in the affirmative. She asked if I was acquainted with the
Latin and Greek? I replied, “A little.” “Oho!” continued she, “and with
philosophy and mathematics, I suppose?” I owned I knew something of
each. Then she repeated her stare and interrogation. I began to repent
of my vanity, and in order to repair the fault I committed, said, it
was not to be wondered at if I had a tolerable education, for learning
was so cheap in my country, that every peasant was a scholar; but, I
hoped her Ladyship would think my understanding no exception to my
character. “No, no, God forbid.” But during the rest of the time they
sat at table, they behaved with remarkable reserve.

This alteration gave me great uneasiness; and I passed the night
without sleep, in melancholy reflections on the vanity of young men,
which prompts them to commit so many foolish actions, contrary to their
own sober judgment. Next day, however, instead of profiting by this
self-condemnation, I yielded still more to the dictates of the
principle I had endeavoured to chastise, and if fortune had not
befriended me more than prudence could expect, I should have been
treated with the contempt it deserved. After breakfast my lady, who was
a true author, bade me follow her into the study, where she expressed
herself thus: “Since you are so learned, you cannot be void of taste;
therefore I am to desire your opinion of a small performance in poetry,
which I lately composed. You must know that I have planned a tragedy,
the subject of which shall be, the murder of a prince before the altar,
where he is busy at his devotions. After the deed is perpetrated, the
regicide will harangue the people with the bloody dagger in his hand;
and I have already composed a speech, which, I think, will suit the
character extremely. Here it is.” Then, taking up a scrap of paper, she
read, with violent emphasis and gesture, as follows:—

“Thus have I sent the simple King to hell,
Without or coffin, shroud, or passing bell:
To me what are divine and human laws?
I court no sanction but my own applause!
Rapes, robberies, treasons, yield my soul delight,
And human carnage gratifies my sight:
I drag the parent by the hoary hair,
And toss the sprawling infant on the spear,
While the fond mother’s cries regale my ear.
I fight, I vanquish, murder friends and foes;
Nor dare the immortal gods my rage oppose.”


Though I did great violence to my understanding in praising this
unnatural rhapsody, I nevertheless extolled it as a production that of
itself deserved immortal fame; and besought her ladyship to bless the
world with the fruits of those uncommon talents Heaven had bestowed
upon her. She smiled with a look of self-complacency, and encouraged by
the incense I had offered, communicated all her poetical works which I
applauded, one by one, with as little candour as I had shown at first.
Satiated with my flattery, which I hope my situation justified, she
could not in conscience refuse me an opportunity of shining in my turn:
and, therefore, after a compliment to my nice discernment and taste,
observed, that doubtless I must have produced something in that way
myself, which she desired to see. This was temptation I could by no
means resist. I owned that while I was at college I wrote some detached
pieces, at the desire of a friend who was in love; and at her request
repeated the following verses, which indeed my love for Narcissa had
inspired:—

On Celia,

Playing on the harpsichord and singing.

When Sappho struck the quivering wire,
The throbbing breast was all on fire:
And when she raised the vocal lay,
The captive soul was charm’d away.

But had the nymph possessed with these
Thy softer, chaster, power to please;
Thy beauteous air of sprightly youth,
Thy native smiles of artless truth;

The worm of grief had never preyed
On the forsaken love-sick maid:
Nor had she mourn’d a hapless flame,
Nor dash’d on rocks her tender frame.


My mistress paid me a cold compliment on the versification, which, she
said, was elegant enough, but, the subject beneath the pen of a true
poet. I was extremely nettled at her indifference, and looked at
Narcissa, who by this time had joined us, for her approbation; but she
declined giving her opinion, protesting she was no judge of these
matters; so that I was forced to retire very much balked in my
expectation, which was generally a little too sanguine. In the
afternoon, however, the waiting-maid assured me that Narcissa had
expressed her approbation of my performance with great warmth, and
desired her to procure a copy of it as for herself, that she (Narcissa)
might have an opportunity to peruse it at pleasure. I was elated to an
extravagant pitch at this intelligence, and immediately transcribed a
fair copy of my Ode, which was carried to the dear charmer, together
with another on the same subject, as follows:—

Thy fatal shaft unerring move;
I bow before thine altar, Love!
I feel thou soft resistless flame
Glide swift through all my vital frame!

For while I gaze my bosom glows,
My blood in tides impetuous flows;
Hope, fear, and joy alternate roll,
And floods of transports ’whelm my soul!

My faltering tongue attempts in vain
In soothing murmurs to complain;
My tongue some secret magic ties,
My murmurs sink in broken sighs.

Condemn’d to nurse eternal care,
And ever drop the silent tear,
Unheard I mourn, unknown I sigh,
Unfriended live, unpitied die!


Whether or not Narcissa discovered my passion, I could not learn from
her behaviour, which, though always benevolent to me was henceforth
more reserved and less cheerful. While my thoughts aspired to a sphere
so far above me, I had unwittingly made a conquest of the cookwench and
dairymaid, who became so jealous of each other that, if their
sentiments had been refined by education, it is probable one or other
of them would have had recourse to poison or steel to be avenged of her
rival; but, as their minds were happily adapted to their humble
station, their mutual enmity was confined to scolding and fistcuffs, in
which exercise they were both well skilled. My good fortune did not
long remain a secret; for it was disclosed by the frequent broils of
these heroines, who kept no decorum in their encounters. The coachman
and gardener, who paid their devoirs to my admirers, each to his
respective choice, alarmed at my success, laid their heads together, in
order to concert a plan of revenge; and the former, having been
educated at the academy at Tottenham Court, undertook to challenge me
to single combat. He accordingly, with many opprobrious invectives,
bade me defiance, and offered to box me for twenty guineas. I told him
that, although I believed myself a match for him even at that work I
would not descend so far below the dignity of a gentleman as to fight
like a porter; but if he had anything to say to me, I was his man at
blunderbuss, musket, pistol, sword, hatchet, spit, cleaver, fork, or
needle; nay, I swore, that should he give his tongue any more saucy
liberties at my expense, I would crop his ears without any ceremony.
This rhodomontade, delivered with a stern countenance and resolute
tone, had the desired effect upon my antagonist, who, with some
confusion, sneaked off, and gave his friend an account of his
reception.

The story, taking air among the servants, procured for me the title of
Gentleman John, with which I was sometimes honoured, even by my
mistress and Narcissa, who had been informed of the whole affair by the
chambermaid. In the meantime, the rival queens expressed their passion
by all the ways in their power: the cook entertained me with choice
bits, the dairymaid with strokings: the first would often encourage me
to declare myself, by complimenting me upon my courage and learning,
and observing, that if she had a husband like me, to maintain order and
keep accounts, she could make a great deal of money, by setting up an
eating-house in London for gentlemen’s servants on board wages. The
other courted my affection by showing her own importance, and telling
me that many a substantial farmer in the neighbourhood would be glad to
marry her, but she was resolved to please her eye, if she should plague
her heart. Then she would launch out into the praise of my proper
person, and say, she was sure I would make a good husband, for I was
very good-natured. I began to be uneasy at the importunities of these
inamoratas, whom, at another time perhaps, I might have pleased without
the disagreeable sauce of matrimony, but, at present, my whole soul was
engrossed by Narcissa; and I could not bear the thoughts of doing
anything derogatory to the passion I entertained for her.




CHAPTER XLI


Narcissa being in danger from the brutality of Sir Timothy, is rescued
by me, who revenge myself on my rival—I declare my passion, and retreat
to the seaside—am surrounded by smugglers, and carried to Boulogne—find
my Uncle Lieutenant Bowling in great distress, and relieve him—our
conversation


At certain intervals my ambition would revive; I would despise myself
for my tame resignation to my sordid fate, and revolve a hundred
schemes for assuming the character of a gentleman, to which I thought
myself entitled by birth and education. In these fruitless suggestions
time stole away unperceived, and I had already remained eight months in
the station of a footman, when an accident happened that put an end to
my servitude, and, for the present, banished all hopes of succeeding in
my love.

Narcissa went one day to visit Miss Thicket, who lived with her brother
within less than a mile of our house, and was persuaded to walk home in
the cool of the evening, accompanied by Sir Timothy, who, having a good
deal of the brute in him, was instigated to use some unbecoming
familiarities with her, encouraged by the solitariness of a field
through which they passed. The lovely creature was incensed at his rude
behaviour for which she reproached him in such a manner that he lost
all regard to decency, and actually offered violence to this pattern of
innocence and beauty. But Heaven would not suffer so much goodness to
be violated, and sent me, who, passing by accident near the place, was
alarmed with her cries, for her succour. What were the emotions of my
soul, when I beheld Narcissa almost sinking beneath the brutal force of
this satyr! I flew like lightning to her rescue, and he, perceiving me,
quitted his prey, and drew his hanger to chastise my presumption. My
indignation was too high to admit one thought of fear, so that, rushing
upon him, I struck his weapon out of his hand, and used my cudgel so
successfully that he fell to the ground, and lay, to all appearance,
without sense. Then I turned to Narcissa, who had swooned, and sitting
down by her, gently raised her head, and supported it on my bosom,
while, with my hand around her waist, I kept her in that position. My
soul was thrilled with tumultuous joy, at feeling the object of my
dearest wishes within my arms; and, while she lay insensible, I could
not refrain from applying my cheeks to hers, and ravishing a kiss. In a
little time the blood began to revisit her face, she opened her
enchanting eyes, and, having recollected her late situation, said, with
a look full of tender acknowledgment, “Dear John, I am eternally
obliged to you!” So saying she made an effort to rise, in which I
assisted her, and she proceeded to the house, leaning upon me all the
way. I was a thousand times tempted by this opportunity to declare my
passion, but the dread of disobliging her restrained my tongue. We had
not moved a hundred paces from the scene of her distress, when I
perceived Sir Timothy rise and walk homeward—a circumstance which,
though it gave me some satisfaction, inasmuch as I thereby knew I had
not killed him, filled me with just apprehension of his resentment,
which I found myself in no condition to withstand; especially when I
considered his intimacy with our squire, to whom I knew he could
justify himself for what he had done, by imputing it to his love, and
desiring his brother Bruin to take the same liberty with his sister,
without any fear of offence.

When we arrived at the house, Narcissa assured me she would exert all
her influence in protecting me from the revenge of Thicket, and
likewise engage her aunt in my favour. At the same time, pulling out
her purse, offered it as a small consideration for the service I had
done her. But I stood too much upon the punctilios of love to incur the
least suspicion of being mercenary, and refused the present, by saying
I had merited nothing by barely doing my duty. She seemed astonished at
my disinterestedness, and blushed: I felt the same suffusion, and, with
a downcast eye and broken accent, told her I had one request to make,
which, if her generosity would grant, I should think myself fully
recompensed, for an age of misery. She changed colour at this preamble,
and, with great confusion, replied, she hoped my good sense would
hinder me from asking anything she was bound in honour to refuse, and
therefore bade me signify my desire. Upon which I kneeled, and engaged
to kiss her hand. She immediately, with an averted look, stretched it
out: I imprinted on it an ardent kiss, and, bathing it with my tears,
cried, “Dear Madam, I am an unfortunate gentleman, and love you to
distraction, but would have died a thousand deaths rather than make
this declaration under such a servile appearance, were I not determined
to yield to the rigour of my fate, to fly from your bewitching
presence, and bury my presumptuous passion in eternal silence.” With
these words I rose, and went away before she could recover her spirits
so far as to make any reply.

My first care was to go and consult Mrs. Sagely, with whom I had
entertained a friendly correspondence ever since I left her house. When
she understood my situation, the good woman, with real concern,
condoled with me on my unhappy fate, and approved of my resolution to
leave the country, as being perfectly well acquainted with the
barbarous disposition of my rival, “who, by this time,” said she, “has
no doubt meditated a scheme of revenge. Indeed, I cannot see how you
will be able to elude his vengeance; being himself in the commission,
he will immediately grant warrants for apprehending you; and, as almost
all the people in this country are dependent on him or his friend, it
will be impossible for you to find shelter among them. If you should be
apprehended, he will commit you to jail, where you may possibly in
great misery languish till the next assizes, and then be transported
for assaulting a magistrate.”

While she thus warned me of my danger, we heard a knocking at the door,
which threw us both into great consternation, as in all probability, it
was occasioned by my pursuers; whereupon this generous old lady,
putting two guineas into my hand, with tears in her eyes, bade me, for
God’s sake, get out at the back-door and consult my safety as
Providence should direct me. There was no time for deliberation. I
followed her advice, and escaped by the benefit of a dark night to the
seaside, where, while I ruminated on my next excursion, I was all of a
sudden surrounded by armed men, who, having bound my hands and feet,
bade me make no noise on pain of being shot, and carried me on board of
a vessel, which I soon perceived to be a smuggling cutter. This
discovery gave me some satisfaction at first, because I concluded
myself safe from the resentment of Sir Timothy; but, when I found
myself in the hands of ruffians, who threatened to execute me for a
spy, I would have thought myself happily quit for a year’s
imprisonment, or even transportation. It was in vain for me to protest
my innocence: I could not persuade them that I had taken a solitary
walk to their haunt, at such an hour, merely for my own amusement; and
I did not think it my interest to disclose the true cause of my
retreat, because I was afraid they would have made their peace with
justice by surrendering me to the penalty of the law. What confirmed
their suspicion was, the appearance of a custom-house yacht, which gave
them chase, and had well nigh made a prize of their vessel; when they
were delivered from their fears by a thick fog, which effectually
screened them, and favoured their arrival at Boulogne. But, before they
got out of sight of their pursuer, they held a council of war about me,
and some of the most ferocious among them would have thrown me
overboard as a traitor who had betrayed them to their enemies; but
others, more considerate, alleged, that if they put me to death, and
should afterwards be taken, they could expect no mercy from the
legislature, which would never pardon outlawry aggravated by murder. It
was therefore determined by a plurality of votes, that I should be set
on shore in France, and left to find my way back to England, as I
should think proper, this being punishment sufficient for the bare
suspicion of a crime in itself not capital.

Although this favourable determination gave me great pleasure, the
apprehension of being robbed would not suffer me to be perfectly at
ease. To prevent this calamity, as soon as I was untied, in consequence
of the aforesaid decision, I tore a small hole in one of my stockings,
into which I dropped six guineas, reserving half a piece and some
silver in my pocket, that, finding something, they might not be tempted
to make any further inquiry. This was a very necessary precaution, for,
when we came within sight of the French shore, one of the smugglers
told me, I must pay for my passage. To this declaration I replied, that
my passage was none of my own seeking; therefore they could not expect
a reward from me for transporting me into a strange country by force.
“D—me!” said the outlaw, “none of your palaver; but let me see what
money you have got.” So saying, he thrust his hand into my pocket
without any ceremony, and emptied it of the contents; then, casting an
eye at my hat and wig, which captivated his fancy, he took them off,
clapping his own on my head, declared, that a fair exchange was no
robbery. I was fain to put up with this bargain, which was by no means
favourable to me; and a little while after we went all on shore
together.

I resolved to take my leave of those desperadoes without much ceremony,
when one of them cautioned me against appearing to their prejudice if
ever I returned to England, unless I had a mind to be murdered; for
which service, he assured me, the gang never wanted agents. I promised
to observe his advice, and departed for the Upper Town, where I
inquired for a cabaret, or public-house, into which I went, with an
intention of taking some refreshment. In the kitchen, five Dutch
sailors sat at breakfast with a large loaf, a firkin of butter, and a
keg of brandy, the bung of which they often applied to their mouths
with great perseverance and satisfaction. At some distance from them I
perceived another person in the same garb, sitting in a pensive
solitary manner, entertaining himself with a whiff of tobacco, from the
stump of a pipe as black as jet. The appearance of distress never
failed to attract my regard and compassion. I approached this forlorn
tar with a view to offer him my assistance, and, notwithstanding the
alteration of dress and disguise of a long beard, I discovered in him
my long lost and lamented uncle and benefactor, Lieutenant Bowling!
Good Heaven! what were the agitations of my soul, between the joy of
finding again such a valuable friend, and the sorrow of seeing him in
such a low condition! The tears gushed down my cheeks; I stood
motionless and silent for some time. At length, recovering the use of
speech, I exclaimed, “Gracious God! Mr. Bowling!” My uncle no sooner
heard his name mentioned, than he started up, crying, with some
surprise, “Holla!” and, after having looked at me steadfastly, without
being able to recollect me, said, “Did you call me, brother,” I told
him I had something extraordinary to communicate, and desired him to
give me the hearing for a few minutes in another room; but he would by
no means consent to this proposal, saying, “Avast there, friend: none
of your tricks upon travellers;—if you have anything to say to me, do
it above board;—you need not be afraid of being overheard;—here are
none who understand our lingo.” Though I was loth to discover myself
before company, I could no longer refrain from telling him I was his
own nephew, Roderick Random. On this information, he considered me with
great earnestness and astonishment, and, recalling my features, which,
though enlarged, were not entirely altered since he had seen me, came
up, and shook me by the hand very cordially, protesting he was glad to
see me well. After some pause, he went on thus; “And yet, my lad, I am
sorry to see you under such colours; the more so, as it is not in my
power, at present, to change them for the better, times being very hard
with me,” With these words I could perceive a tear trickle down his
furrowed cheek, which affected me so much that I wept bitterly.

Imagining my sorrow was the effect of my own misfortunes, he comforted
me with observing, that life was a voyage in which we must expect to
meet with all weathers; sometimes was calm, sometimes rough; that a
fair gale often succeeded a storm; that the wind did not always sit one
way, and that despair signified nothing; that resolution and skill were
better than a stout vessel: for why? because they require no carpenter,
and grow stronger the more labour they undergo. I dried up my tears,
which I assured him were not shed for my own distress, but for his, and
begged leave to accompany him into another room, where we could
converse more at our ease. There I recounted to him the ungenerous
usage I had met with from Potion; at which relation he started up,
stalked across the room three or four times in a great hurry, and,
grasping his cudgel, cried, “I would I were alongside of him—that’s
all—I would I were alongside of him!” I then gave him a detail of my
adventures and sufferings, which affected him more than I could have
imagined; and concluded with telling him that Captain Oakun was still
alive, and that he might return to England when he would to solicit his
affairs, without danger or molestation. He was wonderfully pleased with
this piece of information, of which, however, he said he could not at
present avail himself, for want of money to pay for his passage to
London. This objection I soon removed, by putting five guineas into his
hand, and telling him I thought myself extremely happy in having an
opportunity of manifesting my gratitude to him in his necessity. But it
was with the utmost difficulty I could prevail upon him to accept of
two, which he affirmed were more than sufficient to defray the
necessary expense.

After this friendly contest was over, he proposed we should have a mess
of something; “For,” said he, “it has been banyan day with me a great
while. You must know I was shipwrecked, five days ago, near a place
called Lisieux, in company with those Dutchmen who are now drinking
below; and having but little money when I came ashore, it was soon
spent, because I let them have share and share while it lasted.
Howsomever, I should have remembered the old saying, every hog his own
apple; for when they found my hold unstowed, they went all hands to
shooling and begging; and, because I would not take a spell at the same
duty, refused to give me the least assistance; so that I have not broke
bread these two days.” I was shocked at the extremity of his distress,
and ordered some bread, cheese, and wine, to be brought immediately, to
allay his hunger, until a fricassee of chickens could be prepared. When
he had recruited his spirits with this homely fare, I desired to know
the particulars of his peregrination since the accident at Cape
Tiberoon, which were briefly these: The money he had about him being
all spent at Port Louis, the civility and hospitality of the French
cooled to such a degree, that he was obliged to list on board one of
their king’s ships as a common foremast man, to prevent himself from
starving on shore. In this situation he continued two years, during
which time he had acquired some knowledge of their language, and the
reputation of a good seaman; the ship he belonged to was ordered home
to France, where she was laid up as unfit for service, and he was
received on board one of Monsieur D’Antin’s squadron, in quality of
quartermaster; which office he performed in a voyage to the West
Indies, where he engaged with our ship, as before related; but his
conscience upbraiding him for serving the one enemies of his country,
he quitted the ship at the same place where he first listed, and got to
Curacoa in a Dutch vessel; there he bargained with a skipper, bound to
Europe, to work for his passage to Holland, from whence he was in hopes
of hearing from his friends in England; but was cast away, as he
mentioned before, on the French coast, and must have been reduced to
the necessity of travelling on foot to Holland, and begging for his
subsistence on the road, or of entering on board of another French
man-of-war, at the hazard of being treated as a deserter, if Providence
had not sent me to his succour. “And now, my lad,” continued he, “I
think I shall steer my course directly to London, where I do not doubt
of being replaced, and of having the R taken off me by the Lords of the
Admiralty, to whom I intend to write a petition, setting forth my case;
if I succeed, I shall have wherewithal to give you some assistance,
because, when I left the ship, I had two years’ pay due to me,
therefore I desire to know whither you are bound: and besides, perhaps,
I may have interest enough to procure a warrant appointing you
surgeon’s mate of the ship to which I shall belong—for the beadle of
the Admiralty is my good friend: and he and one of the under clerks are
sworn brothers, and that under clerk has a good deal to say with one of
the upper clerks, who is very well known to the under secretary, who,
upon his recommendation, I hope, will recommend my affair to the first
secretary; and he again will speak to one of the lords in my behalf; so
that you see I do not want friends to assist me on occasion. As for the
fellow Crampley, tho’f I know him not, I am sure he is neither seaman
nor officer, by what you have told me, or else he could never be so
much mistaken in his reckoning, as to run the ship on shore on the
coast of Sussex before he believed himself in soundings; neither, when
that accident happened, would he have left the ship until she had been
stove to pieces, especially when the tide was making; wherefore, by
this time, I do suppose, he has been tried by a court-martial, and
executed for his cowardice and misconduct.”

I could not help smiling at the description of my uncle’s ladder, by
which he proposed to climb to the attention of the board of admiralty;
and, though I knew the world too well to confide in such dependence
myself, I would not discourage him with doubts, but asked if he had no
friend in London, who would advance a small sum of money to enable him
to appear as he ought, and make a small present to the under secretary,
who might possibly dispatch his business the sooner on that account. He
scratched his head, and after some recollection, replied, “Why, yes, I
believe Daniel Whipcord, the ship-chandler in Wapping, would not refuse
me such a small matter. I know I can have what credit I want for
lodging, liquor, and clothes; but as to money, I won’t be positive. Had
honest Block been living, I should not have been at loss.” I was
heartily sorry to find a worthy man so destitute of friends, when he
had such need of them, and looked upon my own situation as less
miserable than his, because I was better acquainted with the
selfishness and roguery of mankind, consequently less liable to
disappointment and imposition.




CHAPTER XLII


He takes his passage in a cutter for Deal—we are accosted by a Priest,
who proves to be a Scotchman—his profession on friendship—he is
affronted by the Lieutenant, who afterwards appeases him by
submission—my uncle embarks—I am introduced by a Priest to a Capuchin,
in whose company I set out for Paris—the character of my fellow
traveller—on adventure on the road—I am shocked at his behaviour


When our repast was ended, we walked down to the harbour, where we
found a cutter that was to sail for Deal in the evening, and Mr.
Bowling agreed for his passage. In the meantime, we sauntered about the
town to satisfy our curiosity, our conversation turning on the subject
of my designs, which were not as yet fixed: neither can it be supposed
that my mind was at ease, when I found myself reduced almost to extreme
poverty, in the midst of foreigners, among whom I had not one
acquaintance to advise or befriend me. My uncle was sensible of my
forlorn condition, and pressed me to accompany him to England, where he
did not doubt of finding some sort of provision for me; but besides the
other reasons I had for avoiding that kingdom, I looked upon it, at
this time, as the worst country in the universe for a poor honest man
to live in; and therefore determined to remain in France, at all
events.

I was confirmed in this resolution by a reverend priest, who, passing
by at this time, and overhearing us speak English, accosted us in the
same language, telling us he was our countryman, and wishing it might
be in his power to do us any service. We thanked this grave person for
his courteous offer, and invited him to drink a glass with us, which he
did not think proper to refuse, and we went altogether into a tavern of
his recommending. After having drunk to our healths in a bumper of good
Burgundy, he began to inquire into our situation, particularly the
place of our nativity, which we no sooner named than he started up,
and, wringing our hands with great fervour, shed a flood of tears,
crying, “I come from the same part of the country! perhaps you are my
own relations.” I was on my guard against his caresses, which I
suspected very much, when I remembered the adventure of the
money-dropper; but, without any appearance of diffidence, observed,
that, as he was born in that part of the country, he must certainly
know our families, which (howsoever mean our present appearance might
be) were none of the most obscure or inconsiderable. Then I discovered
our names, to which I found he was no stranger; he had known my
grandfather personally; and, notwithstanding an absence of fifty years
from Scotland, recounted so many particulars of the families in the
neighbourhood, that my scruples were entirely removed, and I thought
myself happy in his acquaintance. In the course of our conversation, I
disclosed my condition without reserve, and displayed my talents to
such advantage, that the old father looked upon me with admiration, and
assured me, that, if I stayed in France, and listened to reason, I
could not fail of making my fortune, to which he would contribute all
in his power.

My uncle began to be jealous of the Priest’s insinuation, and very
abruptly declared, that if ever I should renounce my religion, he would
break off all connection and correspondence with me; for it was his
opinion, that no honest man would swerve from his principles in which
he was bred, whether Turkish, Protestant, or Roman. The father,
affronted at this declaration, with great vehemence began a long
discourse, setting forth the danger of obstinacy, and shutting one’s
eyes against the light. He said, that ignorance would be no plea
towards justification, when we had opportunities of being better
informed; and, that, if the minds of people had not been open to
conviction, the Christian religion could not have been propagated in
the world, and we should now be in a state of Pagan darkness and
barbarity: he endeavoured to prove, by some texts of Scripture and many
quotations from the Fathers, that the Pope was the successor of St.
Peter, and vicar of Jesus Christ; that the church of Rome was the true,
holy, catholic church; and that the Protestant faith was an impious
heresy and damnable schism, by which many millions of souls would
suffer everlasting perdition. When he had finished his sermon, which I
thought he pronounced with more zeal than discretion, he addressed
himself to my uncle, desired to know his objections to what had been
said. The lieutenant, whose attention had been wholly engrossed by his
own affairs, took the pipe out of his mouth, and replied, “As for me,
friend, d’ye see, I have no objection to what you say; it may be either
truth or false, for what I know; I meddle with nobody’s affairs but my
own; the gunner to his linstock, and the steersman to the helm, as the
saying is. I trust to no creed but the compass, and do unto every man
as I would be done by; so that I defy the Pope, the Devil, and the
Pretender; and hope to be saved as well as another.” This association
of persons gave great offence to the friar, who protested, in a mighty
passion, that if Mr. Bowling had not been his countryman, he would have
caused him to be imprisoned for his insolence; I ventured to disapprove
of my uncle’s rashness, and appeased the old gentleman, by assuring him
there was no offence intended by my kinsman, who, by this time sensible
of his error, shook the injured party by the hand, and asked pardon for
the freedom he had taken. Matters being amicably compromised, he
invited us to come and see him in the afternoon at the convent to which
he belonged, and took his leave for the present; when my uncle
recommended it strongly to me to persevere in the religion of my
forefathers, whatever advantages might propose to myself by a change,
which could not fail of disgracing myself, and dishonouring my family.
I assured him no consideration would induce me to forfeit his
friendship and good opinion on that score; at which assurance he
discovered great satisfaction, and put me in mind of dinner, which we
immediately bespoke, and when it was ready, ate together.

I imagined my acquaintance with the Scottish priest if properly
managed, might turn out to my advantage, and therefore resolved to
cultivate it as much as I could. With this view we visited him at his
convent, according to his invitation, where he treated us with wine and
sweetmeats, and showed us everything that was remarkable in the
monastery. Having been thus entertained, we took our leave, though not
before I had promised to see him next day, and the time fixed for my
uncle’s embarking being come, I accompanied him to the harbour, and saw
him on board. We parted not without tears, after we had embraced and
wished one another all manner of prosperity: and he entreated me to
write to him often, directing to Lieutenant Bowling, at the sign of the
Union Flag, near the Hermitage, London.

I returned to the house in which we had met, where I passed the night
in a very solitary manner, reflecting on the severity of my fate, and
endeavouring to project some likely scheme of life for the future; but
my invention failed me; I saw nothing but insurmountable difficulties
in my way, and was ready to despair at the miserable prospect! That I
might not, however, neglect any probable reason, I got up in the
morning, and went directly to the father, whose advice and assistance I
implored. He received me very kindly, and gave me to understand, that
there was one way of life in which a person of my talents could not
fail of making a great figure. I guessed his meaning, and told him,
once for all, I was fully determined against any alteration in point of
religion; therefore if his proposal regarded the church, he might save
himself the trouble of explaining it. He shook his head and sighed,
saying, “Ah! son, son, what a glorious prospect is here spoiled by your
stubborn prejudice! Suffer yourself to be persuaded by reason, and
consult your temporal welfare, as well as the concerns of your eternal
soul. I can, by my interest procure your admission as a noviciate to
this convent, where I will superintend and direct you with a truly
paternal affection.” Then he launched out into the praises of a
monastic life, which no noise disturbs, no cares molest, and no danger
invades—where the heart is weaned from carnal attachments, the grosser
appetite subdued and chastised, and the soul wafted to divine regions
of philosophy and truth, on the wing of studious contemplation. But his
eloquence was lost upon me, whom two considerations enabled to
withstand his temptation; namely, my promise to my uncle, and my
aversion to an ecclesiastical life; for as to the difference of
religion, I looked upon it as a thing of too small moment to come in
competition with a man’s fortune. Finding me immovable on this head, he
told me, he was more sorry than offended at my noncompliance, and still
ready to employ his good offices in my behalf. “The same erroneous
maxims,” said he, “that obstruct your promotion in the church, will
infallibly prevent your advancement in the army; but, if you can brook
the condition of a servant, I am acquainted with some people of rank at
Versailles, to whom I can give you letters of recommendation, that you
may be entertained by some one of them in quality of maitre d’hotel;
and I do not doubt that your qualifications will soon entitle you to a
better provision.” I embraced his offer with great eagerness, and he
appointed me to come back in the afternoon, when he would not only give
me letters, but likewise introduce me to a capuchin of his
acquaintance, who intended to set out for Paris next morning in whose
company I might travel, without being at the expense of one livre
during the whole journey. This piece of good news gave me infinite
pleasure; I acknowledged my obligation to the benevolent father in the
most grateful expressions; and he performed his promise to a tittle, in
delivering the letters, and making me acquainted with the capuchin,
with whom I departed next morning by break of day.

It was not long before I discovered my fellow traveller to be a merry
facetious fellow, who, notwithstanding his profession and appearance of
mortification, loved good eating and drinking better than his rosary,
and paid more adoration to a pretty girl than to the Virgin Mary, or
St. Genevieve. He was a thick brawny young man, with red eyebrows, a
hook nose, a face covered with freckles; and his name was Frere
Balthazar. His order did not permit him to wear linen, so that, having
little occasion to undress himself, he was none of the cleanliest
animals in the world; and his constitution was naturally so strongly
scented that I always thought it convenient to keep to the windward of
him in our march. As he was perfectly well known on the road, we fared
sumptuously without any cost, and the fatigue of our journey was much
alleviated by the good humour of my companion, who sang an infinite
number of catches on the subjects of love and wine. We took up our
lodging the first night at a peasant’s house not far from Abbeville,
where we were entertained with an excellent ragout, cooked by our
landlord’s daughters, one of whom was very handsome. After having eaten
heartily and drank a sufficient quantity of small wine, we were
conducted to a barn, where we found a couple of carpets spread upon
clean straw for our reception. We had not lain in this situation above
half-an-hour, when we heard somebody knock softly at the door, upon
which Balthazar got up, and let in our host’s two daughters, who wanted
to have some private conversation with him in the dark. When they had
whispered together some time, the capuchin came to me, and asked if I
was insensible to love, and so hard-hearted as to refuse a share of my
bed to a pretty maid who had a tendre for me? I must own to my shame,
that I suffered myself to be overcome by my passion, and with great
eagerness seized the occasion, when I understood that the amiable
Nanette was to be my bedfellow. In vain did my reason suggest the
respect that I owed to my dear mistress Narcissa; the idea of that
lovely charmer rather increased than allayed the ferment of my spirits;
and the young paysanne had no reason to complain of my remembrance.
Early in the morning, the kind creatures left us to our repose, which
lasted till eight o’clock when we got up, and were treated at breakfast
with chocolate and l’eau-de-vie by our paramours, of whom we took a
tender leave, after my companion had confessed and given them
absolution.

While we proceeded on our journey, the conversation turned upon the
night’s adventure, being introduced by the capuchin, who asked me how I
liked my lodging; I declared my satisfaction, and talked in rapture of
the agreeable Nanette, at which he shook his head, and smiling said,
she was a morceau pour la bonne bouche. “I never valued myself,”
continued he, “upon anything so much as the conquest of Nanette; and,
vanity apart, I have been pretty fortunate in my amours.” This
information shocked me not a little, as I was well convinced of his
intimacy with her sister; and though I did not care to tax him with
downright incest, I professed my astonishment at his last night’s
choice, when, I supposed, the other was at his devotion. To this hint
he answered that, besides his natural complaisance to the sex, he had
another reason to distribute his favours equally between them, namely,
to preserve peace in the family, which could not otherwise be
maintained; that, moreover, Nanette had conceived an affection for me,
and he loved her too well to balk her inclination; more especially,
when he had an opportunity of obliging his friend at the same time. I
thanked him for this instance of his friendship, though I was extremely
disgusted at his want of delicacy, and cursed the occasion that threw
me in his way. Libertine as I was, I could not bear to see a man behave
so wide of the character he assumed. I looked upon him as a person of
very little worth or honesty, and should even have kept a wary eye upon
my pocket, if I had thought he could have had any temptation to steal.
But I could not conceive the use of money to a capuchin, who is
obliged, by the rules of his order, to appear like a beggar, and enjoy
all other necessaries of life gratis; besides, my fellow traveller
seemed to be of a complexion too careless and sanguine to give me any
apprehension on that score; so that I proceeded with great confidence,
in expectation of being soon at my journey’s end.




CHAPTER XLIII


We lodge at a House near Amiens, where I am robbed by the Capuchin, who
escapes while I am asleep—I go to Noyons in search of him, but without
Success—make my Condition known to several People, but find no
Relief—grow desperate—find a Company of Soldiers—Enlist in the Regiment
of Picardy—we are ordered into Germany—I find the Fatigues of the March
almost intolerable—Quarrel with my Comrade in a dispute about
Politics—he challenges me to the Field—wounds and disarms me


The third night of our pilgrimage we passed at a house near Amiens,
where being unknown, we supped upon indifferent fare and sour wine, and
were fain to be in a garret upon an old mattress, which, I believe had
been in the possession of ten thousand myriads of fleas time out of
mind. We did not invade their territory with impunity; in less than a
minute we were attacked by stings innumerable, in spite of which,
however, I fell fast asleep, being excessively fatigued with our day’s
march, and did not wake till nine next morning, when, seeing myself
alone, I started up in a terrible fright, and, examining my pockets,
found my presaging fear too true! My companion had made free with my
cash, and left me to seek my way to Paris by myself! I ran down stairs
immediately; and, with a look full of grief and amazement, inquired for
the mendicant, who, they gave me to understand, had set out four hours
before, after having told them I was a little indisposed, and desired I
might not be disturbed, but be informed when I should wake, that he had
taken the road to Noyons, where he would wait for my coming, at the Coq
d’Or. I spoke not a word, but with a heavy heart directed my course to
that place, at which I arrived in the afternoon, fainting with
weariness and hunger; but learned to my utter confusion, that no such
person had been there! It was happy for me that I had a good deal of
resentment in my constitution, which animated me on such occasions
against the villainy of mankind, and enabled me to bear misfortunes,
otherwise intolerable. Boiling with indignation, I discovered to the
host my deplorable condition, and inveighed with great bitterness
against the treachery of Balthazar; at which he shrugged up his
shoulders, and with a peculiar grimace on his countenance, said, he was
sorry for my misfortune, but there was no remedy like patience. At that
instant some guests arrived, to whom he hastened to offer his service,
leaving me mortified at his indifference, and fully persuaded that an
innkeeper is the same sordid animal all the world over.

While I stood in the porch forlorn and undetermined, venting
ejaculations of curses against the thief who had robbed me, and the old
priest who recommended him to my friendship, a young gentleman richly
dressed, attended by a valet de chambre and two servants in livery,
arrived at the inn. I thought I perceived a great deal of sweetness and
good-nature in his countenance; therefore he had no sooner alighted
than I accosted him, and, in a few words, explained my situation: he
listened with great politeness, and, when I made an end of my story,
said, “Well, monsieur, what would you have me to do?” I was effectually
abashed at this interrogation, which, I believe, no man of common sense
or generosity could make, and made no other compliment than a low bow:
he returned the compliment still lower, and tripped into an apartment,
while the landlord let me know that my standing there to interrupt
company gave offence, and might do him infinite prejudice. He had no
occasion to repeat his insinuation; I moved from the place immediately,
and was so much transported with grief, anger, and disdain, that a
torrent of blood gushed from my nostrils. In this ecstacy, I quitted
Noyons, and betook myself to the fields, where I wandered about like
one distracted, till my spirits were quite exhausted, and I was obliged
to throw myself down at the root of a tree, to rest my wearied limbs.
Here my rage forsook me: I began to feel the importunate cravings of
nature, and relapsed into silent sorrow and melancholy reflection. I
revolved all the crimes I had been guilty of and found them too few and
venial, that I could not comprehend the justice of that Providence,
which, after having exposed me to so much wretchedness and danger, left
me a prey to famine at last in a foreign country, where I had not one
friend or acquaintance to close my eyes, and do the last offices of
humanity to my miserable carcass. A thousand times I wished myself a
bear, that I might retreat to woods and deserts, far from the
inhospitable haunts of man, where I could live by my own talents,
independent of treacherous friends and supercilious scorn.

As I lay in this manner, groaning over my hapless fate, I heard the
sound of a violin, and raising my head, perceived a company of men and
women dancing on the grass at some distance from me. I looked upon this
to be a favourable season for distress to attract compassion, when
every selfish thought is banished, and the heart dilated with mirth and
social joy; wherefore I got up, and approached those happy people, whom
I soon discovered to be a party of soldiers, with their wives and
children, unbending and diverting themselves at this rate, after the
fatigue of a march. I had never before seen such a parcel of scarecrows
together, neither could I reconcile their meagre and gaunt looks, their
squalid and ragged attire, and every other external symptom of extreme
woe, with this appearance of festivity. I saluted them, however, and
was received with great politeness; after which they formed a ring, and
danced around me. This jollity had a wonderful effect upon my spirits.
I was infected with their gaiety, and in spite of my dismal situation,
forgot my cares, and joined in their extravagance. When we had
recreated ourselves a good while at this diversion, the ladies spread
their manteaus on the ground, upon which they emptied their knapsacks
of some onions, coarse bread, and a few flasks of poor wine: being
invited to a share of the banquet, I sat down with the rest, and, in
the whole course of my life, never made a more comfortable meal. When
our repast was ended, we got up again to dance, and, now that I found
myself refreshed I behaved to the admiration of everybody; I was loaded
with a thousand compliments and professions of friendship: the men
commended my person and agility, and the women were loud in the praise
of my bonne grace; the sergeant in particular expressed so much regard
for me, and described the pleasures of a soldier’s life to me with so
much art, that I began to listen to his proposal of enlisting me in the
service; and the more I considered my own condition, the more I was
convinced of the necessity I was under to come to a speedy
determination.

Having, therefore, maturely weighed the circumstances pro and con I
signified my consent, and was admitted into the regiment of Picardy,
said to be the oldest corps in Europe. The company to which this
commander belonged was quartered at a village not far off, whither we
marched next day, and I was presented to my captain, who seemed very
well pleased with my appearance, gave me a crown to drink, and ordered
me to be accommodated with clothes, arms, and accoutrements. Then I
sold my livery suit, purchased linen, and, as I was at great pains to
learn the exercise, in a very short time became a complete soldier.

It was not long before we received orders to join several more
regiments, and march with all expedition into Germany, in order to
reinforce Mareschal Duc de Noailles, who was then encamped with his
army on the side of the river Mayne, to watch the motions of the
English, Hanoverians, Austrians, and Hessians, under the command of the
Earl of Stair. We began our march accordingly, and then I became
acquainted with that part of a soldier’s life to which I had been
hitherto a stranger. It is impossible to describe the hunger and thirst
I sustained, and the fatigue I underwent in a march of so many hundred
miles; during which, I was so much chafed with the heat and motion of
my limbs, that in a very short time the inside of my thighs and legs
were deprived of skin, and I proceeded in the utmost torture. This
misfortune I owed to the plumpness of my constitution, which I cursed,
and envied the withered condition of my comrades, whose bodies could
not spare juice enough to supply a common issue, and were indeed proof
against all manner of friction. The continual pain I felt made me
fretful, and my peevishness was increased by the mortification of my
pride in seeing those miserable wretches, whom a hard gale of wind
would have scattered through the air like chaff, bear those toils with
alacrity under which I was ready to sink.

One day, while we enjoyed a halt, and the soldiers with their wives had
gone out to dance, according to custom, my comrade stayed at home with
me on pretence of friendship, and insulted me with his pity and
consolation! He told me that, though I was young and tender at present,
I should soon be seasoned to the service; and he did not doubt but I
should have the honour to contribute in some measure to the glory of
the king. “Have courage, therefore, my child,” said he, “and pray to
the good God, that you may be as happy as I am, who have had the honour
of serving Louis the Great, and of receiving many wounds, in helping to
establish his glory.” When I looked upon the contemptible object that
pronounced these words, I was amazed at the infatuation that possessed
him; and could not help expressing my astonishment at the absurdity of
a rational who thinks himself highly honoured, in being permitted to
encounter abject poverty, oppression, famine, disease, mutilation, and
evident death merely to gratify the vicious ambition of a prince, by
whom his sufferings were disregarded, and his name utterly unknown. I
observed that, if his situation were the consequence of compulsion, I
would praise his patience and fortitude in bearing his lot: if he had
taken up arms in defence of his injured country, he was to be applauded
for his patriotism: or if he had fled to this way of life as a refuge
from a greater evil, he was justifiable in his own conscience (though I
could have no notion of misery more extreme than he suffered); but to
put his condition on the footing of conducing to the glory of his
prince, was no more than professing himself a desperate slave, who
voluntarily underwent the utmost wretchedness and peril, and committed
the most flagrant crimes, to soothe the barbarous pride of a
fellow-creature, his superior in nothing but the power he derived from
the submission of such wretches as him. The soldier was very much
affronted at the liberty I took with his king, which, he said, nothing
but my ignorance could excuse: he affirmed that the characters of
princes were sacred, and ought not to be profaned by the censure of
their subjects, who were bound by their allegiance to obey their
commands, of what nature soever, without scruple or repining; and
advised me to correct the rebellious principles I had imbibed among the
English, who, for their insolence to their kings, were notorious all
over the world, even to a proverb.

In vindication of my countrymen, I repeated all the arguments commonly
used to prove that every man has a natural right to liberty; that
allegiance and protection are reciprocal; that, when the mutual tie is
broken by the tyranny of the king, he is accountable to the people for
his breach of contract, and subject to the penalties of the law; and
that those insurrections of the English, which are branded with the
name of rebellion by the slaves of arbitrary power, were no other than
glorious efforts to rescue that independence which was their
birthright, from the ravenous claws of usurping ambition. The
Frenchman, provoked at the little deference I paid to the kingly name,
lost all patience, and reproached me in such a manner that my temper
forsook me, I clenched my fist, with an intention to give him a hearty
box on the ear. Perceiving my design, he started back and demanded a
parley; upon which I checked my indignation, and he gave me to
understand that a Frenchman never forgave a blow; therefore, if I were
not weary of my life, I would do well to spare him that mortification,
and do him the honour of measuring his sword with mine, like a
gentleman. I took his advice and followed him to a field hard by, where
indeed I was ashamed at the pitiful figure of my antagonist, who was a
poor little shivering creature, decrepit with age, and blind of one
eye. But I soon found the folly of judging from appearances; being at
the second pass wounded in the sword hand, and immediately disarmed
with such a jerk, that I thought the joint was dislocated. I was no
less confounded than enraged at this event, especially as my adversary
did not bear his success with all the moderation that might have been
expected; for he insisted upon my asking pardon for affronting his king
and him. This proposal I would by no means comply with, but told him,
it was a mean condescension, which no gentleman in his circumstances
ought to propose, nor any in my situation ought to perform; and that,
if he persisted in his ungenerous demand, I would in my turn claim
satisfaction with my musket, when we should be more upon a par than
with the sword, of which he seemed so much master.




CHAPTER XLIV


In order to be revenged, I learn the Science of Defence—we join
Mareschal Duc de Noailles, are engaged with the Allies of Dettingen,
and put to flight—the behaviour of the French soldiers on that
occasion—I industriously seek another combat with the old Gascon, and
vanquish him in my turn—our regiment is put into Winter Quarters at
Rheims, where I find my friend Strap—our Recognition—he supplies me
with Money, and procures my Discharge—we take a trip to Paris; from
whence, by the way of Flanders, we set out for London; where we safely
arrive


He was disconcerted at this declaration, to which he made no reply, but
repaired to the dancers, among whom he recounted his victory with many
exaggerations and gasconades; while I, taking up my sword, went to my
quarters, and examined my wound, which I found was of no consequence.
The same day an Irish drummer, having heard of my misfortune, visited
me, and after having condoled me on the chance of war, gave me to
understand, that he was master of the sword, and would in a very short
time instruct me so thoroughly in that noble science, that I should be
able to chastise the old Gascon for his insolent boasting at my
expense. This friendly office he proffered on pretence of the regard he
had for his countrymen; but I afterwards learned the true motive was no
other than a jealousy he entertained of a correspondence between the
Frenchman and his wife, which he did not think proper to resent in
person. Be this as it will, I accepted his offer and practised his
lessons with such application, that I soon believed myself a match for
my conqueror. In the meantime we continued our march, and arrived at
the Camp of Mareschal Noailles the night before the battle at
Dettingen: notwithstanding the fatigue we had undergone, our regiment
was one of those that were ordered next day to cross the river, under
the command of the Duc de Grammont, to take possession of a narrow
defile, through which the allies must of necessity have passed at a
great disadvantage, or remain where they were, and perish for want of
provision, if they would not condescend to surrender at discretion. How
they suffered themselves to be pent up in this manner it is not my
province to relate; I shall only observe that, when we had taken
possession of our ground, I heard an old officer in conversation with
another express a surprise at the conduct of Lord Stair, who had the
reputation of a good general. But it seems, at this time, that nobleman
was overruled, and only acted in an inferior character; so that no part
of the blame could be imputed to him, who declared his disapprobation
of the step, in consequence of which the whole army was in the utmost
danger; but Providence or destiny acted miracles in their behalf, by
disposing the Duc de Grammont to quit his advantageous post, pass the
defile, and attack the English, who were drawn up in order of battle on
the plain, and who handled us so roughly that, after having lost a
great number of men, we turned our backs without ceremony, and fled
with such precipitation that many hundreds perished in the river
through pure fear and confusion: for the enemy were so generous that
they did not pursue us one inch of ground; and, if our consternation
would have permitted, we might have retreated with great order and
deliberation. But, notwithstanding the royal clemency of the king of
Great Britain, who headed the allies in person, and, no doubt, put a
stop to the carnage, our loss amounted to five thousand men, among whom
were many officers of distinction. Our miscarriage opened a passage for
the foe to Haynau, whither they immediately marched, leaving their sick
and wounded to the care of the French, who next day took possession of
the field of battle, buried the dead, and treated the living with
humanity.

This circumstance was a great consolation to us, who thence took
occasion to claim the victory; and the genius of the French nation
never appeared more conspicuous than now, in the rhodomontades they
uttered on the subject of their generosity and courage. Every man (by
his own account) performed feats that eclipsed all the heroes of
antiquity. One compared himself to a lion retiring at leisure from his
cowardly pursuers, who keep at a wary distance, and gall him with their
darts. Another likened himself to a bear that retreats with his face to
the enemy, who dare not assail him; and the third assumed the character
of a desperate stag, that turns upon the hounds and keeps them at bay.
There was not a private soldier engaged who had not by the prowess of
his single arm demolished a whole platoon, or put a squadron of horse
to flight; and, among others, the meagre Gascon extolled his exploits
above those of Hercules or Charlemagne. As I still retained my
resentment for the disgrace I suffered in my last rencontre with him,
and, now that I thought myself qualified, longed for an opportunity to
retrieve my honour, I magnified the valour of the English with all the
hyperboles I could imagine, and described the pusillanimity of the
French in the same style, comparing them to hares flying before
greyhounds, or mice pursued by cats; and passed an ironical compliment
on the speed he exerted in his flight, which, considering his age and
infirmities I said was surprising. He was stung to the quick by this
sarcasm, and, with an air of threatening disdain, bade me know myself
better, and remember the correction I had already received from him for
my insolence; for he might not always be in the humour of sparing a
wretch who abused his goodness. To this inuendo I made no reply but by
a kick on the breech, which overturned him in an instant. He started up
with wonderful agility, and, drawing his sword, attacked me with great
fury. Several people interposed, but, when he informed them of its
being an affair of honour, they retired, and left us to decide the
battle by ourselves. I sustained his onset with little damage, having
only received a small scratch on my right shoulder, and, seeing his
breath and vigour almost exhausted, assaulted him in my turn, closed
with him, and wrested his sword out of his hand in the struggle. Having
thus acquired the victory, I desired him to beg his life; to which
demand he made no answer, but shrugged up his shoulders to his ears,
expanded his hands, elevated the skin on his forehead and eyebrows, and
depressed the corners of his mouth in such a manner, that I could
scarce refrain from laughing aloud at his grotesque appearance. That I
might, however, mortify his vanity, which triumphed without bounds over
my misfortune, I thrust his sword up to the hilt in something (it was
not a tansy), that lay smoking on the plain, and joined the rest of the
soldiers with an air of tranquillity and indifference.

There was nothing more of moment attempted by either of the armies
during the remaining part of the campaign, which being ended, the
English marched back to the Netherlands; part of our army was detached
to French Flanders, and our regiment ordered into winter quarters in
Champagne. It was the fate of the grenadier company, to which I now
belonged, to lie at Rheims, where I found myself in the utmost want of
everything, my pay, which amounted to five sols a day, far from
supplying me with necessaries, being scarce sufficient to procure a
wretched subsistence to keep soul and body together; so that I was, by
hunger and hard duty, brought down to the meagre condition of my
fellow-soldiers, and my linen reduced from three tolerable shirts to
two pair of sleeves and necks, the bodies having been long ago
converted into spatterdaches; and after all, I was better provided than
any private man in the regiment. In this urgency of my affairs, I wrote
to my uncle in England, though my hopes from that quarter were not at
all sanguine, for the reasons I have already explained; and in the
meantime had recourse to my old remedy patience, consoling myself with
the flattering suggestions of a lively imagination, that never
abandoned me in my distress.

One day, while I stood sentinel at the gate of a general officer, a
certain nobleman came to the door, followed by a gentleman in mourning,
to whom, at parting, I heard him say, “You may depend upon my good
offices.” This assurance was answered by a low bow of the person in
black, who, turning to go away, discovered to me the individual
countenance of my old friend and adherent Strap. I was so much
astonished at the sight, that I lost the power of utterance, and,
before I could recollect myself, he was gone without taking any notice
of me. Indeed, had he stayed, I scarcely should have ventured to accost
him; because, though I was perfectly well acquainted with the features
of his face, I could not be positively certain as to the rest of his
person, which was very much altered for the better since he left me at
London, neither could I conceive by which means he was enabled to
appear in the sphere of a gentleman, to which, while I knew him, he had
not even the ambition to aspire. But I was too much concerned in the
affair to neglect further information, and therefore took the first
opportunity of asking the porter if he knew the gentleman to whom the
marquis spoke. The Swiss told me his name was Monsieur d’Estrapes, that
he had been valet-de-chambre to an English gentleman lately deceased,
and that he was very much regarded by the marquis for his fidelity to
his master, between whom and that nobleman a very intimate friendship
had subsisted. Nothing could be more agreeable to me than this piece of
intelligence, which banished all doubt of its being my friend, who had
found means to frenchify his name as well as his behaviour since we
parted. As soon, therefore, as I was relieved, I went to his lodging,
according to a direction given me by the Swiss, and had the good
fortune to find him at home. That I might surprise him the more, I
concealed my name and business, and only desired the servant of the
house to tell Monsieur d’Estrapes that I begged the honour of
half-an-hour’s conversation with him. He was confounded and dismayed at
this message, when he understood it was sent by a soldier; though he
was conscious to himself of no crime, all that he had heard of the
Bastille appeared to his imagination with aggravated horror, but it was
not before I had waited a considerable time that he had resolution
enough to bid the servant show me up-stairs.

When I entered his chamber, he returned my bow with great civility, and
endeavoured, with forced complaisance, to disguise his fear, which
appeared in the paleness of his face, the wildness of his looks, and
the shaking of his limbs. I was diverted at his consternation, which
redoubled, when I told him in French, I had business for his private
ear and demanded a particular audience. The valet being withdrawn, I
asked in the same language if his name was d’Estrapes, to which he
answered with a faltering tongue, “The same, at your service.” “Are you
a Frenchman?” Said I. “I have not the honour of being a Frenchman
born,” replied he, “but I have an infinite veneration for the country.”
I then desired he would do me the honour to look at me, which he no
sooner did than, struck with my appearance, he started back, and cried
in English, “O Jesus!—sure it can’t! No ’tis impossible!” I smiled at
his interjections, saying, “I suppose you are too much of a gentleman
to own your friend in adversity.” When he heard me pronounce these
words in our own language, he leaped upon me in a transport of joy,
hung about my neck, kissed me from ear to ear, and blubbered like a
great schoolboy who had been whipped. Then, observing my dress, he set
up his throat, crying, “O Lord! O Lord! that ever I should live to see
my dearest friend reduced to the condition of a foot soldier in the
French service! Why did you consent to my leaving you?—but I know the
reason—you thought you had got more creditable friends, and grew
ashamed of my acquaintance. Ah! Lord help us! though I was a little
short-sighted, I was not altogether blind: and though I did not
complain, I was not the less sensible of your unkindness, which was
indeed the only thing that induced me to ramble abroad, the Lord knows
whither; but I must own it has been a lucky ramble for me, and so I
forgive you, and may God forgive you! O Lord! Lord! is it come to
this?” I was nettled at the charge, which, though just, I could not
help thinking unseasonable, and told him with some tartness that,
whether his suspicions were well or ill grounded, he might have chosen
a more convenient opportunity of introducing them; and that the
question now was whether or no he found himself disposed to lend me any
assistance. “Disposed!” replied he with great emotion; “I thought you
had known me so well as to assure yourself without asking, that I, and
all that belongs to me, are at your command. In the meantime you shall
dine with me, and I will tell you something that, perhaps, will not be
displeasing unto you.” Then, wringing my hand, he said, “It makes my
heart bleed to see you in that garb!” I thanked him for his invitation,
which, I observed, could not be unwelcome to a person who had not eaten
a comfortable meal these seven months; but I had another request to
make, which I begged he would grant before dinner, and that was the
loan of a shirt; for although my back had been many weeks a stranger to
any comfort of that kind, my skin was not yet familiarised to the want
of it. He stared in my face, with a woful countenance, at this
declaration, which he could scarce believe, until I explained it by
unbuttoning my coat and disclosing my naked body—a circumstance which
shocked the tender-hearted Strap, who, with tears in his eyes, ran to a
chest of drawers, and taking out some linen, presented to me a very
fine ruffled Holland shirt and cambric neckcloth, assuring me he had
three dozen of the same kind at my service.

I was ravished at this piece of good news and, having accommodated
myself in a moment, hugged my benefactor for his generous offer,
saying, I was overjoyed to find him undebauched by prosperity, which
seldom fails to corrupt the heart. He bespoke for dinner some soup and
bouilli, a couple of pullets roasted, and a dish of asparagus, and in
the interim entertained me with biscuit and Burgundy, after which
repast he entreated me to gratify his longing desire of knowing every
circumstance of my fortune since his departure from London. This
request I complied with, beginning at the adventure of Gawky, and
relating every particular event in which I had been concerned from that
day to the present hour. During the recital, my friend was strongly
affected, according to the various situations described. He stared with
surprise, glowed with indignation, gaped with curiosity, smiled with
pleasure, trembled with fear, and wept with sorrow, as the vicissitudes
of my life inspired these different passions; and, when my story was
ended, signified his amazement on the whole, by lifting up his eyes and
hands and protesting that, though I was a young man, had suffered more
than all the blessed martyrs.

After dinner, I desired in my turn to know the particulars of his
peregrination, and he satisfied me in a few words, by giving me to
understand that he had lived a year at Paris with his master, who, in
that time having acquired the language, as well as the fashionable
exercises to perfection, made a tour of France and Holland, during
which excursion he was so unfortunate as to meet with three of his own
countrymen on their travels, in whose company he committed such
excesses, that his constitution failed, and he fell into a consumption;
that by the advice of physicians, he went to Montpelier for the benefit
of good air, and recovered so well in six weeks, that he returned to
Rheims seemingly in good health, where he had not continued above a
month, when he was seized with a looseness that carried him off in ten
days, to the unspeakable sorrow of all who knew him and especially of
Strap, who had been very happy in his service, and given such
satisfaction, that his master, on his death-bed recommended him to
several persons of distinction for his diligence, sobriety, and
affection, and left him by will his wearing apparel, gold watch, sword,
rings, ready money, and all the moveables he had in France, to the
value of three hundred pounds “which I now,” said he, “in the sight of
God and man, surrender to your absolute disposal: here are my keys;
take them, I beseech you, and God give you joy of the possession.” My
brain was almost turned by this sudden change of fortune, which I could
scarce believe real: however, I positively refused this extravagant
proffer of my friend, and put him in mind of my being a soldier; at
which hint he started, crying, “Odso! that’s true! we must procure your
discharge. I have some interest with a nobleman who is able to do me
that favour.”

We consulted about this affair, and it was determined that Monsieur
d’Estrapes should wait upon the Marquis in the morning, and tell him he
had by accident found his brother, whom he had not seen for many years
before, a private soldier in the regiment of Picardy, and implore that
nobleman’s interest for his discharge. In the meantime, we enjoyed
ourselves over a bottle of good Burgundy, and spent the evening in
concerting schemes for our future conduct, in case I should be so lucky
as to get rid of the army. The business was to make ourselves easy for
life by means of his legacy, a task very difficult, and, in the usual
methods of laying out money, altogether impracticable, so that, after
much canvassing, we could come to no resolution that night, but when we
parted, recommended the matter to the serious attention of each other.
As for my own part, I puzzled my imagination to no purpose. When I
thought of turning merchant, the smallness of our stock, and the risk
of seas, enemies, and markets, deterred me from that scheme. If I
should settle as a surgeon in my own country, I would find the business
already overstocked; or, if I pretended to set up in England, must
labour under want of friends and powerful opposition, obstacles
insurmountable by the most shining merit: neither should I succeed in
my endeavours to rise in the state, inasmuch as I could neither flatter
nor pimp for courtiers, nor prostitute my pen in defence of a wicked
and contemptible administration. Before I could form any feasible
project, I fell asleep, and my fancy was blest with the image of the
dear Narcissa, who seemed to smile upon my passion, and offer her hand
as a reward for all my toils.

Early in the morning, I went to the lodgings of my friend, whom I found
exulting over his happy invention! for I no sooner entered his
apartment, than he addressed himself to me in these words, with a smile
of self-applause: “Well, Mr. Random, a lucky thought may come into a
fool’s head sometimes. I have hit it—I’ll hold you a button my plan is
better than yours, for all your learning. But you shall have the
preference in this as in all other things; therefore proceed, and let
us know the effects of your meditation; and then I will impart my own
simple excogitations.” I told him, that not one thought had occurred to
me which deserved the least notice, and signified my impatience to be
acquainted with the fruits of his reflection. “As we have not,” said
he, “money sufficient to maintain us during a tedious expectation, it
is my opinion that a bold push must be made; and I see none so likely
to succeed as your appearing in the character of a gentleman (which is
your due), and making your addresses to some lady of fortune, who can
render you independent at once. Nay, don’t stare—I affirm that this
scheme is both prudent and honourable; for I would not have you throw
yourself away upon an old toothless wheezing dame, whose breath would
stink you into a consumption in less than three months, neither would I
advise you to assume the character of a wealthy squire, as your common
fortune-hunters do, by which means many a poor lady is cheated into
matrimony, and instead of enjoying the pomp and grandeur that was
promised, sees her dowry seized by her husband’s rapacious creditors,
and herself reduced to misery and despair. No, I know you have a soul
that disdains such imposition; and are master of qualifications, both
of mind and body, which alone entitle you to a match that will set you
above the world. I have clothes in my possession that a duke need not
be ashamed to wear. I believe they will fit you as they are, if not
there are plenty of tailors in France. Let us take a short trip to
Paris, and provide ourselves with all other necessaries, then set out
for England, where I intend to do myself the honour of attending you in
quality of a valet. This expedient will save you the expense of a
servant, shaving, and dressing; and I doubt not but, by the blessing of
God, we shall bring matters to a speedy and fortunate issue.”
Extravagant as this proposal was, I listened to it with pleasure,
because it flattered my vanity, and indulged a ridiculous hope I began
to entertain of inspiring Narcissa with a mutual flame.

After breakfast, Monsieur d’Estrapes went to pay his devoirs to the
marquis, and was so successful in his application, that I obtained a
discharge in a few days, upon which we set out for Paris. Here I had
time to reflect and congratulate myself upon this sudden transition of
fate, which to bear with moderation required some degree of philosophy
and self-denial. This truth will be more obvious, if I give a detail of
the particulars, to the quiet possession of which I was raised in an
instant, from the most abject misery and contempt. My wardrobe
consisted of five fashionable coats full mounted, two of which were
plain, one of cut velvet, one trimmed with gold, and another with
silver lace, two frocks, one of white drab, with large plate buttons,
the other of blue with gold binding; one waistcoat of gold brocade; one
of blue satin, embroidered with silver; one of green silk, trimmed with
figured broad gold lace; one of black silk, with fringes; one of white
satin, one of black cloth, and one of scarlet; six pair of cloth
breeches; one pair of crimson, and another of black velvet; twelve pair
of white silk stockings, as many of black silk, and the same number of
white cotton; one hat, laced with gold point d’Espagne, another with
silver lace scolloped, a third with gold binding, and a fourth plain;
three dozen of fine ruffled shirts, as many neckcloths; one dozen of
cambric handkerchiefs, and the like number of silk. The other
moveables, which I possessed by the generosity and friendship of Strap,
were a gold watch with a chased case, two valuable diamond rings, two
mourning swords, one with a silver handle, and a fourth cut steel
inlaid with gold, a diamond stock buckle, and a set of stone buckles
for the knees and shoes; a pair of silver-mounted pistols with rich
housings; a gold-headed cane, and a snuff-box of tortoiseshell, mounted
with gold, having the picture of a lady in the top. The gentleman left
many other things of value, which my friend had converted into cash
before I met with him; so that, over and above these particulars, our
stock in ready money amounted to something more than two hundred
pounds.

Thus equipped, I put on the gentleman of figure, and, attended by my
honest friend, who was contented with the station of my valet, visited
the Louvre, examined the gallery of Luxembourg, and appeared at
Versailles, where I had the honour of seeing his Most Christian Majesty
eat a considerable quantity of olives. During the month I spent at
Paris, I went several times to court, the Italian comedy, opera, and
playhouse, danced at a masquerade, and, in short, saw everything
remarkable in and about that capital. Then we set out for England by
the way of Flanders, passed through Brussels, Ghent, and Bruges, and
took shipping at Ostend, from whence, in fourteen hours, we arrived at
Deal, hired a postchaise, and in twelve hours more got safe to London,
having disposed of our heavy baggage in the waggon.




CHAPTER XLV


I inquire for my Uncle, and understand he is gone to sea—take Lodgings
at Charing Cross—go to the Play, where I meet with an adventure—Dine at
an ordinary—the Guests described—become acquainted with Medlar and
Doctor Wagtail


As soon as we alighted at the inn, I dispatched Strap to inquire for my
uncle at the Union Flag in Wapping; and he returned in a little time,
with an account of Mr. Bowling’s having gone to sea, mate of a merchant
ship, after a long and unsuccessful application attendance at the
Admiralty; where, it seems, the interest he depended upon was not
sufficient to reinstate him, or recover the pay that was due to him
when he quitted the Thunder.

Next day I hired very handsome lodgings not far from Charing Cross; and
in the evening dressed myself in a plain suit of the true Paris cut,
and appeared in a front box at the play, where I saw a good deal of
company, and was vain enough to believe that I was observed with an
uncommon degree of attention and applause. This silly conceit
intoxicated me so much, that I was guilty of a thousand ridiculous
coquetries; and I dare say, how favourable soever the thoughts of the
company might be at my first appearance, they were soon changed by my
absurd behaviour into pity or contempt. I rose and sat down, covered
and uncovered my head twenty times between the acts; pulled out my
watch, clapped it to my ear, wound it up, set it, gave it the hearing
again; displayed my snuff-box, affected to take snuff, that I might
have all opportunity of showing my brilliant, and wiped my nose with
perfumed handkerchief; then dangled my cane, and adjusted my
sword-knot, and acted many more fooleries of the same kind, in hopes of
obtaining the character of a pretty fellow, in the acquiring of which I
found two considerable obstructions in my disposition—namely, a natural
reserve and jealous sensibility. Fain would I have entered into
conversation with the people around me: but I was restrained by the
fear of being censured for my assurance, as well as by reflecting that
I was more entitled to a compliment of this kind from them, than they
to such condescension from a stranger like me. How often did I redden
at the frequent whispers and loud laughter of my fellow beaux, which I
imagined were excited by me; and how often did I envy the happy
indifference of those choice spirits, who behold the distress of the
scene without discovering the least symptom of approbation or concern.
My attention was engaged in spite of myself, and I could not help
weeping with the heroine of the stage, though I practised a great many
shifs to conceal this piece of unpolite weakness.

When the play was ended, I sat waiting for an opportunity of handing
some lady to her coach; but everyone was attended by such a number of
officious gallants, that for a long time I was balked in my
expectation. At length, however, I perceived a very handsome creature,
genteelly dressed, sitting by herself in a box, at some distance from
me; upon which I went up to her, and offered my service. She seemed to
be in some confusion, thanked me for my complaisance, and with a tender
look declined giving me the trouble: looking at her watch, and
testifying her surprise at the negligence of her footman whom she had
ordered to have a chair ready for her at that hour. I repeated my
entreaty with all the eloquence and compliment I was master of; and, in
the event, she was prevailed upon to accept of a proposal I made, to
send my servant for a chair or coach: accordingly, Strap was detached
for that purpose, and returned without success. By this time the
playhouse was quite empty, and we were obliged to retire. As I led her
through the passage, I observed five or six young fellows of fashion
standing in a corner, one of whom, as I thought, tipped my charmer the
wink, and when we were passed, I heard a loud laugh. This note aroused
my attention, and I was resolved to be fully satisfied of this lady’s
character, before I should have any nearer connection with her. As no
convenience appeared, I proposed to conduct her to a tavern, where we
might stay a few minutes, until my servant could fetch a coach from the
Strand. She seemed particularly shy of trusting herself in a tavern
with a stranger, but at last yielded to my pathetic remonstrances,
rather than endanger her health by remaining in a cold, damp
thoroughfare. Having thus far succeeded, I begged to know what wine she
would be pleased to drink a glass of; but she professed the greatest
aversion to all sorts of strong liquors, and it was with much
difficulty that I could persuade her to eat a jelly.

In the meantime, I endeavoured to alleviate the uneasiness she
discovered, by saying all the agreeable things I could think of; at
which she would often sigh, and regard me with a languishing look, that
seemed, however, too near akin to the lewd leer of a courtesan. This
discovery added to my former suspicion, while it put me upon my guard
against her arts, divested me of reserve, and enabled me to entertain
her with gaiety and freedom. In the course of our conversation, I
pressed her to allow me the honour of waiting upon her next day at her
lodgings, a request which she, with many apologues, refused, lest it
should give umbrage to Sir John, who was of a disposition apt to be
fretted with trifles. This information, by which I was to understand
that her husband was a knight, did not check my addresses, which became
more and more importunate, and I was even hardy enough to ravish a
kiss. But, O heavens! instead of banqueting on the ambrosial flavour,
that her delicacy of complexion promised, I was almost suffocated with
the steams of Geneva! An exhalation of this kind, from a mouth which
had just before declared an utter abhorrence of all spirituous liquors,
not only changed my doubts into certainty, but my raptures into
loathing; and it would have been impossible for me to have preserved
common complaisance five minutes longer, when my servant returned with
a coach. I took the advantage of this occasion, and presented my hand
to the lady, who put in practice against me the whole artillery of her
charms, ogling, languishing, sighing, and squeezing, with so little
reserve that Strap perceived her tenderness, and rubbed his hands with
joy as he followed us to the door; but I was proof against all her
endearments, and handed her into the coach with an intention to take my
leave immediately. She guessed my design, and invited me to her house,
whispering, that now Sir John was gone to bed, she could have the
pleasure of my conversation for half-an-hour without interruption. I
told her there was no mortification I would not undergo, rather than
endanger the repose of her ladyship; and, bidding the coachman drive
on, wished her a good night. She lost all temper at my indifference,
and, stopping the coach, at the distance of about twenty yards from me,
popped out her head, and howled with the lungs of a fishwoman, “D—n
you, you dog, won’t you pay the coach-hire?” As I made no answer, she
held forth against me with an eloquence peculiar to herself; calling me
pitifull fellow, scoundrel, and a hundred such appellations; concluding
with an oath, that, for all my appearance, she believed I had got no
money in my pocket.

Having thus vented her indignation, she ordered her coachman to
proceed, and I returned to the tavern, where I bespoke something for
supper, very well pleased at the issue of this adventure. I dispensed
with the attendance of the waiter at table, on pretence that my own
servant was present, and, when we were alone, said to Strap, “Well,
Monsieur d’Estrapes, what d’ye think of this lady?” My friend, who had
not opened his mouth since her departure, could make no other reply
than the monosyllable “Think!” which he pronounced with a note of fear
and astonishment. Surprised at this emphasis, I surveyed my valet, and,
perceiving a wildness in his looks, asked if he had seen his
grandfather’s ghost? “Ghost!” said he, “I am sure I have seen a devil
incarnate! Who would have thought that so much devilish malice and
Billingsgate could lurk under so much sweetness of countenance and
modesty of behaviour? Ah! God help us! Fronti nulla fides—nimium ne
crede colori—but we ought to down on our knees, and bless God for
delivering us from the jaws of that painted sepulchre!” I was pretty
much of Strap’s opinion, and, though I did not believe myself in any
danger from the allurements of that sisterhood, I determined to act
with great circumspection for the future, and shun all commerce of that
kind, as equally prejudicial to my purse and constitution.

My next care was to introduce myself into a set of good acquaintance:
for which purpose I frequented a certain coffee-house, noted for the
resort of good company, English as well as foreigners, where my
appearance procured all the civilities and advances I could desire. As
there was an ordinary in the same house, I went upstairs to dinner with
the other guests, and found myself at a table with thirteen people, the
greatest part of whom were better dressed than myself. The
conversation, which was mostly carried on in French, turned chiefly on
politics; and I soon found the whole company were in the French
interest, myself excepted, and a testy old gentleman, who contradicted
everything that was advanced in favour of his Most Christian Majesty,
with a surliness truly English. But this trusty patriot, who had never
been out of his own country, and drew all his maxims and notions from
prejudice and hearsay, was very unequal to his antagonists, who were
superior to him in learning and experience, and often took the liberty
of travellers in asserting things which were not strictly true, because
they thought themselves in no danger of being detected by him. The
claim of the Queen Of Spain to the Austrian dominions in Italy was
fully explained and vindicated, by a person who sat opposite to me,
and, by the solemnity of his manner and the richness of his apparel,
seemed to be a foreign ambassador. This dissertation produced another
on the Pragmatic Sanction, handled with great warmth by a young
gentleman at my right hand, dressed in a green frock, trimmed with
gold, who justified the French king for his breach of that contract;
and affirmed that he could not have observed it without injuring his
own glory. Although I was not at all convinced by this gentleman’s
arguments, I could not help admiring his vivacity which, I imagined,
must be the effect of his illustrious birth and noble education, and
accordingly rated him, in my conjecture, as a young prince on his
travels. The discourse was afterwards shifted by an old gentleman, of a
very martial appearance, to the last campaign, when the battle of
Dettingen was fought over again, with so many circumstances to the
honour of the French and disadvantages if the Allies, that I began to
entertain some doubts of my having been there in person, and took the
liberty to mention some objections to what he advanced. This freedom
introduced a dispute, which lasted a good while, to the mortification
of all present; and was at last referred to the determination of a
grave person, whom they styled Doctor, and who, under a show of great
moderation, decided it against me, with so little regard to truth, that
I taxed him with partiality in pretty severe terms, to the no small
entertainment of the true English politician, who rejoiced at my
defence of a cause he had so often espoused without success.

My opponent, pleased with the victory he had gained, affected a great
deal of candour, and told me, he should not have been so positive, if
he had not been at great pains to inform himself of each particular.
“Indeed,” said he, “I am convinced that the previous steps considered,
things could not happen otherwise; for we generals who have seen
service, though we may not be on the spot ourselves, know by the least
sketch of the disposition what must be the event.” He then censured,
with great freedom, every circumstance of the conduct of those who
commanded the Allies; from thence made a transition to the ministry,
which he honoured with many invectives for employing people who had
neither experience nor capacity, to the prejudice of old officers, who
had been distinguished for both; dropped many hints of his own
importance, and concluded with observing, that the French and Spaniards
knew better how to value generals of merit; the good effects of which
are seen in the conquests they gain, and the discipline of their
troops, which are at the same time better clothed and paid than any
soldiers in the universe. These remarks furnished the green knight with
an opportunity of launching out in the praise of the French government
in general, civil as well as military; on which occasion he made many
odious comparisons to the disadvantage of the English. Everybody,
almost, assented to the observations he made, and the doctor gave his
sanction, by saying, the people of France were undoubtedly the happiest
subjects in the world. I was so much astonished and confounded at their
infatuation and effrontery, that I had not power to utter one word in
opposition to their assertions; but my morose associate could not put
up with the indignity that was offered to Old England, and therefore
with a satirical grin addressed himself to the general in these words:
“Sir, sir, I have often heard it said, She’s a villainous bird that
befouls her own nest. As for what those people who are foreigners say,
I don’t mind it; they know no better; but you who were bred and born,
and have got your bread, under the English government, should have more
regard to gratitude, as well as truth in censuring your native country.
If the ministry have thought fit to lay you aside, I suppose they have
their own reasons for so doing; and you ought to remember, that you
still live on the bounty of this nation. As for these gentlemen
(meaning the prince and ambassador), who make so free with our
constitution, laws, and genius of our people, I think they might show a
little more respect for their benefactors, who, I must own, are to
blame in harbouring and protecting, and encouraging such ungrateful
vagrants as they are.” At these words, the chevalier in green started
up in a great passion, and laying his hand on the hilt of his hanger,
exclaimed, “Ah! foutre!” The Englishman on the other hand, grasping his
cane cried, “Don’t foutre me, sirrah, or by G—d I’ll knock you down.”
The company interposed, the Frenchman sat down again, and his
antagonist proceeded—“Lookey, Monsieur, you know very well that had you
dared to speak so freely of the administration of your own country in
Paris as you have done of ours in London, you would have been sent to
the Bastille without ceremony, where you might have rotted in a
dungeon, and never seen the light of the sun again. Now, sir, take my
word for it, although our constitution screens us from such oppression,
we want not laws to chastise the authors of seditious discourse, and if
I hear another syllable out of your mouth in contempt or prejudice of
this kingdom, I will give you a convincing proof of what I advance, and
have you laid by the heels for your presumption.” This declaration had
an effect on the company as sudden as surprising. The young prince
became as supple as a spaniel, the ambassador trembled, the general sat
silent and abashed, and the doctor, who it seems, had felt the rod of
power, grew pale as death, and assured us all, that he had no intention
to affront any person or people. “Your principles, doctor,” resumed the
old gentleman, “are no secret—I have nothing to say upon that head; but
am very much surprised, that a man who despises us so much, should
notwithstanding live among us, when he has no visible motive for so
doing. Why don’t you take up your habitation in your beloved France,
where you may rail at England without censure?” To this remonstrance
the doctor thought proper to make no reply, and an unsocial silence
ensued; which I perceiving, took notice, that it was pity such idle
disputes, maintained very often through whim or diversion, should
create any misunderstanding among gentlemen of good sense, and proposed
to drink down all animosity in another bottle.

This motion was applauded by the whole company. The wine was brought,
and the English champion, declaring he had no spleen against any man
for differing in opinion from him, any more than for difference of
complexion, drank to the good health of all present; the compliment was
returned, and the conversation once more became unreserved though more
general than before. Among other topics, the subject of war was
introduced, on which the general declaimed with great eloquence,
recounting many of his own exploits by way of illustration. In the
course of his harangue he happened to mention the word epaulement, upon
which the testy gentleman asked the meaning, of that term. “I’ll tell
you what an epaulement is,” replied he, “I never saw an epaulement but
once, and that was at the siege of Namur. In a council of war, Monsieur
Cohorn, the famous engineer, affirmed that the place could not be
taken.” “Yes,” said the Prince of Vandemont, “it may be taken by an
epaulement.” “This was immediately put into execution, and in
twenty-four hours Mareschal Boufflers was fain to capitulate.” Here he
made a full stop, and the old gentleman repeated the question, “But
pray what is an epaulement?” To this interrogation the officer made no
immediate reply, but rang the bell, and called for the bill, which
being brought, he threw down his proportion of the reckoning, and,
telling the company he would show them an epaulement when his majesty
should think fit to entrust him with the command of our army abroad,
strutted away with great dignity. I could not imagine why he was so shy
of explaining one of the most simple terms of fortification, which I
forthwith described as a side-work composed of earth, gabions, or
fascines; but I was very much surprised when I afterwards understood
that his reserve proceeded from his ignorance.

Having paid our bill, we adjourned to the coffee-room, where my
fellow-labourer insisted on treating me with a dish, giving me to
understand, at the same time, that I had acquired his good opinion,
both with respect to my principles and understanding. I thanked him for
his compliment, and, professing myself an utter stranger in this part
of the world, begged he would have the goodness to inform me of the
quality and characters of the people who dined above. This request was
a real favour to one of his disposition, which was no less
communicative than curious; he therefore complied with great
satisfaction, and told me, to my extreme astonishment, that the
supposed young prince was a dancer at one of the theatres, and the
ambassador no other than a fiddler belonging to the opera. “The
doctor,” said he “is a Roman Catholic priest, who sometimes appears in
the character of an officer, and assumes the name of captain; but more
generally takes the garb, title, and behaviour of a physician, in which
capacity he wheedles himself into the confidence of weak-minded people,
and by arguments no less specious than false, converts them from their
religion and allegiance. He has been in the hands of justice more than
once for such practices, but he is a sly dog, and manages matters with
so much craft, that hitherto he has escaped for a short imprisonment.
As for the general, you may see he has owed his promotion more to his
interest than his capacity; and, now that the eyes of the ministry are
opened, his friends dead or become inconsiderable, he is struck off the
list, and obliged to put up with a yearly pension. In consequence of
this reduction, he is become malcontent, and inveighs against the
government in all companies, with so little discretion, that I am
surprised at the lenity of the administration, in overlooking his
insolence, but the truth of the matter is, he owes his safety to his
weakness and want of importance. He has seen a little, and but a
little, service, and yet, if you will take his word to it, there has
not been a great action performed in the field since the Revolution, in
which he was not principally concerned. When a story is told of any
great general, he immediately matches it with one of himself, though he
is often unhappy in his invention, and commits such gross blunders in
the detail, that everybody is in pain for him. Caesar, Pompey, and
Alexander the Great, are continually in his mouth; and, as he reads a
good deal without any judgment to digest it, his ideas are confused,
and his harangues as unintelligible as infinite; for, if once he begin,
there is no chance of his leaving off speaking while one person remains
to yield attention; therefore the only expedient I know, for putting a
stop to his loquacity, is to lay hold of some incongruity he has
uttered, and demand an explanation; or ask the meaning of some
difficult term that he knows by name; this method will effectually put
him to silence, if not to flight, as it happened when I inquired about
an epaulement. Had he been acquainted with the signification of that
word, his triumph would have been intolerable, and we must have quitted
the field first, or been worried with impertinence.”

Having thus gratified my curiosity, the old gentleman began to discover
his own, in questions relating to myself, to which I thought proper to
return ambiguous answers. “I presume, Sir,” said he, “you have
travelled.” I answered, “Yes.” “I dare say you have found it very
expensive,” said he. I replied, “To be sure, one cannot travel without
money.” “That I know by experience,” said he, “for I myself take a trip
to Bath or Tunbridge every season; and one must pay sauce for what he
has on the road, as well in other countries as in this. That’s a pretty
stone in your ring—give me leave, sir—the French have attained to a
wonderful skill in making compositions of this kind. Why, now, this
looks almost as well as a diamond.” “Almost as well, Sir!” said I, “Why
not altogether? I am sure if you understand anything of jewels, you
must perceive, at first sight, that this stone is a real diamond, and
that of a very fine water. Take it in your hand and examine it.” He did
so with some confusion, and returned it, saying, “I ask your pardon; I
see it is a true brilliant of immense value.” I imagined his respect to
me increased after this inquiry; therefore to captivate his esteem the
more, I told him, I would show him a seal of composition, engraved
after a very valuable antique; upon which I pulled out my watch with a
rich gold chain, adorned with three seals set in gold, and an opal
ring. He viewed each of them with great eagerness, handled the chain,
admired the chased case, and observed that the whole must have cost me
a vast sum of money. I affected indifference, and replied in a careless
manner, “Some trifle of sixty or seventy guineas.” He stared in my face
for some time, and then asked if I was an Englishman? I answered in the
negative. “You are from Ireland then, Sir, I presume,” said he. I made
the same reply. “Oh! perhaps,” said he “you were born in one of our
settlements abroad.” I still answered No. He seemed very much
surprised, and said, he was sure I was not a foreigner. I made no
reply, but left him upon the tenter-hooks of impatient uncertainty. He
could not contain his anxiety, but asked pardon for the liberties he
had taken and, to encourage me the more to disclose my situation,
displayed his own without reserve. “I am,” said he, “a single man, have
a considerable annuity, on which I live according to my inclination,
and make the ends of the year meet very comfortably. As I have no
estate to leave behind, I am not troubled with the importunate
officiousness of relations or legacy hunters, and I consider the world
as made for me, not me for the world. It is my maxim, therefore, to
enjoy it while I can, and let futurity shift for itself.”

While he thus indulged his own talkative vein, and at the same time, no
doubt, expected retaliation from me, a young man entered, dressed in
black velvet and an enormous tie-wig, with an air in which natural
levity and affected solemnity were so jumbled together, that on the
whole he appeared a burlesque on all decorum. This ridiculous oddity
danced up to the table at which we sat, and, after a thousand grimaces,
asked my friend by the name of Mr. Medlar, if we were not engaged upon
business. My companion put on a surly countenance, and replied “No
great business, doctor—but however—” “Oh! then,” cried the physician;
“I must beg your indulgence a little; pray pardon me, gentlemen.”
“Sir,” said he, addressing himself to me, “your most humble servant. I
hope you will forgive me, sir—I must beg the favour to sit—sir—sir—I
have something of consequence to impart to my friend Mr. Medlar—sir, I
hope you will excuse my freedom in whispering, sir,” Before I had time
to give this complaisant person my permission, Mr. Medlar cried, “I’ll
have no whispering—if you have anything to say to me, speak with an
audible voice.” The doctor seemed a little disconcerted at this
exclamation, and, turning again to me, made a thousand apologies for
pretending to make a mystery of anything, a piece of caution which he
said was owing to his ignorance of my connection with Mr. Medlar; but
now he understood I was a friend, and would communicate what he had to
say in my hearing. He then began, after two or three hems, in this
manner: “You must know, sir, I am just come from dinner at my Lady
Flareit’s (then addressing himself to me), a lady of quality, sir, at
whose table I have the honour of dining sometimes. There was Lady
Stately and my Lady Larum, and Mrs. Dainty, and Miss Biddy Giggler,
upon my word, a very good-natured young lady, with a very pretty
fortune sir. There was also my Lord Straddle. Sir John Shrug, and
Master Billy Chatter, who is actually a very facetious young gentleman.
So, sir, her ladyship seeing me excessively fatigued, for she was the
last of fifteen patients (people of distinction, sir) whom I had
visited this forenoon, insisted upon my staying dinner, though upon my
word I protest I had no appetite; however, in compliance with her
ladyship’s request, sir, I sat down, and the conversation turning on
different subjects, among other things, Mr Chatter asked very earnestly
when I saw Mr. Medlar. I told him I had not had the pleasure of seeing
you these nineteen hours and a half; for you may remember, sir, it was
nearly about that time; I won’t be positive as to a minute.” “No,” says
he, “then I desire you will go to his lodgings immediately after
dinner, and see what’s the matter with him, for he must certainly be
very bad from having eaten last night such a vast quantity of raw
oysters.” The crusty gentleman, who, from the solemnity of his
delivery, expected something extraordinary, no sooner heard his
conclusion, than he started up in a testy humour, crying, “Pshaw,
pshaw! D—n your oysters!” and walked away, after a short compliment of,
“Your servant sir,” to me. The doctor got up also, saying, “I vow and
protest, upon my word, I am actually amazed;” and followed Mr. Medlar
to the bar, which was hard by, where he was paying for his coffee:
there he whispered so loud that I could overhear, “Pray who is this
gentleman?” His friend replied hastily, “I might have known that before
now, if it had not been for your impertinent intrusion,”—and walked off
very much disappointed. The ceremonious physician returned immediately
and sat down by me, asking a thousand pardons for leaving me alone: and
giving me to understand that what he had communicated to Mr. Medlar at
the bar, was an affair of the last importance, that would admit of no
delay. He then called for some coffee, and launched out into the
virtues of that berry, which, he said, in cold phlegmatic
constitutions, like his, dried up the superfluous moisture, and braced
the relaxed nerves. He told me it was utterly unknown to the ancients;
and derived its name from an Arabian word, which I might easily
perceive by the sound and termination. From this topic he transferred
his disquisitions to the verb drink, which he affirmed was improperly
applied to the taking of coffee, inasmuch as people did not drink, but
sip or sipple that liquor; that the genuine meaning of drinking is to
quench one’s thirst, or commit a debauch by swallowing wine; that the
Latin word, which conveyed the same idea, was bibere or potare, and
that of the Greeks pinein or poteein, though he was apt to believe they
were differently used on different occasions: for example—to drink a
vast quantity, or, as the vulgar express it, to drink an ocean of
liquor, was in Latin potare, and in Greek poteein; and, on the other
hand, to use it moderately, was bibere and pinein;—that this was only a
conjecture of his, which, however, seemed to be supported by the word
bibulous, which is particularly applied to the pores of the skin, and
can only drink a very small quantity of the circumambient moisture, by
reason of the smallness of their diameters;—whereas, from the verb
poteein is derived the substantive potamos, which signifies a river, or
vast quantity of liquor. I could not help smiling at this learned and
important investigation; and, to recommend myself the more to my new
acquaintance, whose disposition I was by this time well informed of, I
observed that, what he alleged, did not, to the best of my remembrance,
appear in the writings of the ancients; for Horace uses the words poto
and bibo indifferently for the same purpose, as in the twentieth Ode of
his first Book.

“Vile potabis modicis sabinum cantharis—
—Et prœlo domitam caleno tu bibes uvam.”


That I had never heard of the verb _poteein_, but that _potamos,
potema_, and _potos_, were derived from _pino, poso, pepoka_, in
consequence of which, the Greek poets never use any other word for
festal drinking. Homer describes Nestor at his cups in these words,

“Nestora d’ouk elathen iache _pinonta_ perempes.”


And Anacreon mentions it on the same occasion always in every page.

“_Pinonti_ de oinon hedun.
Otan _pino_ ton oinon.
Opliz’ ego de _pino_.”


And in a thousand other places. The doctor who doubtless intended by
his criticism to give me a high idea of his erudition, was infinitely
surprised to find himself schooled by one of my appearance; and after a
considerable pause cried, “Upon my word, you are in the right, sir—I
find I have not considered this affair with my usual accuracy.” Then,
accosting me in Latin, which he spoke very well, the conversation was
maintained full two hours, on a variety of subjects, in that language;
and indeed he spoke so judiciously, that I was convinced,
notwithstanding his whimsical appearance and attention to trifles, that
he was a man of extensive knowledge, especially in books; he looked
upon me, as I afterwards understood from Mr. Medlar, as a prodigy in
learning, and proposed that very night, if I were not engaged, to
introduce me to several young gentlemen of fortune and fashion, with
whom I had an appointment at the Bedford coffee house.




CHAPTER XLVI


Wagtail introduces me to a set of fine Gentlemen with whom I spend the
Evening at a Tavern—our Conversation—the Characters of my new
Companions—the Doctor is roasted—our Issue of our Debauch


I accepted his offer with pleasure, and we went thither in a hackney
coach where I saw a great number of gay figures fluttering about, most
of whom spoke to the doctor with great familiarity. Among the rest
stood a group of them round the fire whom I immediately knew to be the
very persons who had the night before, by their laughing, alarmed my
suspicion of the lady who had put herself under my protection. They no
sooner perceived me enter with Dr. Wagtail (for that was my companion’s
name) than they tittered and whispered one to another, and I was not a
little surprised to find that they were the gentlemen to whose
acquaintance he designed to recommend me; for, when he observed them
together, he told me who they were, and desired to know by what name he
should introduce me. I satisfied him in that particular, and he
advanced with great gravity, saying, “Gentlemen, your most obedient
servant:—give me leave to introduce my friend Mr. Random to your
society.” Then, turning to me, “Mr. Random, this is Mr. Bragwell—Mr.
Banter, sir—Mr. Chatter—my friend Mr. Slyboot, and Mr. Ranter sir.” I
saluted each of then in order, and when I came to take Mr. Slyboot by
the hand, I perceived him thrust his tongue in his cheek, to the no
small entertainment of the company; but I did not think proper to take
any notice of it on this occasion. Mr. Ranter too (who I afterwards
learned was a player) displayed his talents, by mimicking my air,
features, and voice, while he returned my compliment: this feat I
should not have been so sensible of, had I not seen him behave in the
same manner to my friend Wagtail, when he made up to them at first. But
for once I let him enjoy the fruits of his dexterity without question
or control, resolved however to chastise his insolence at a more
convenient opportunity. Mr. Slyboot, guessing I was a stranger, asked
if I had been lately in France? and when I answered in the affirmative,
inquired if I had seen the Luxembourg Gallery? I told him I had
considered it more than once with great attention: upon this a
conversion ensued, in which I discovered him to be a painter.

While we were discoursing upon the particulars of this famous
performance, I overheard Banter ask Dr. Wagtail, where he had picked up
this Mr. Random. To which question the physician answered, “Upon my
word, a mighty pretty sort of a gentleman—a man of fortune, sir—he has
made the grand tour, and seen the best company in Europe, air.” “What,
he told you so, I suppose?” said the other: “I take him to be neither
more nor less than a French valet-de-chambre.” “O barbarous,
barbarous!” cried the doctor; “this is actually, upon my word,
altogether unaccountable. I know all his family perfectly well, sir; he
is of the Randoms of the north—a very ancient house sir, and a distant
relation of mine.” I was extremely nettled at the conjecture of Mr.
Banter, and began to entertain a very indifferent opinion of my company
in general; but, as I might possibly by their means acquire a more
extensive and agreeable acquaintance, I determined to bear these little
mortifications as long as I could without injuring the dignity of my
character. After having talked for some time on the weather, plays,
politics, and other coffee-house subjects, it was proposed that we
should spend the evening at a noted tavern in the neighbourhood,
whither we repaired in a body.

Having taken possession of a room, called for French wine, and bespoke
supper, the glass went about pretty freely, and the characters of my
associates opened upon me more and more. It soon appeared that the
doctor was entertained as butt for the painter and player to exercise
their wit upon, for the diversion of the company. Mr. Ranter began the
game by asking him what was good for a hoarseness, lowness of spirits,
and in digestion, for he was troubled with all these complaints to a
very great degree. Wagtail immediately undertook to explain the nature
of his case, and in a very prolix manner harangued upon prognostics,
diagnostics, symptomatics, therapeutics, inanition, and repletion; then
calculated the force of the stomach and lungs in their respective
operations; ascribed the player’s malady to a disorder in these organs,
proceeding from hard drinkings and vociferations, and prescribed a
course of stomachics, with abstinence from venery, wine, loud speaking,
laughing, singing, coughing, sneezing, or hallooing. “Pah, pah!” cried
Ranter, interrupting him, “the remedy is worse than the disease—I wish
I knew where to find some tinder water.” “Tinder water!” said the
doctor; “Upon my word, I don’t apprehend you, Mr. Ranter.” “Water
extracted from tinder,” replied the other, “a universal specific for
all distempers incident to man. It was invented by a learned German
monk, who, for a valuable consideration, imparted the secret to
Paracelsus.” “Pardon me,” cried the painter, “it was first used by
Solomon, as appears by a Greek manuscript in his civil handwriting,
lately found at the foot of Mount Lebanon, by a peasant who was digging
for potatoes—” “Well,” said Wagtail, “in all my vast reading, I never
met with such a preparation! neither did I know till this minute, that
Solomon understood Greek, or that potatoes grew in Palestine.”

Here Banter interposed, saying, he was surprised that Dr. Wagtail
should make the least doubt of Solomon’s understanding Greek, when he
is represented to us as the wisest and best-educated prince in the
world; and as for potatoes, they were transplanted thither from
Ireland, in the time of the Crusade, by some knights of that country.
“I profess,” said the doctor, “there is nothing more likely. I would
actually give a vast sum for a sight of that manuscript, which must be
inestimable; and, if I understood the process, would set about it
immediately.” The player assured him the process was very simple—that
he must cram a hundred-weight of dry tinder into a glass retort, and,
distilling it by the force of animal heat, it would yield half a
scruple of insipid water, one drop of which is a full dose. “Upon my
integrity!” exclaimed the incredulous doctor, “this is very amazing and
extraordinary! that a caput mortuum should yield any water at all. I
must own I have always been an enemy to specifics which I thought
inconsistent with the nature of the animal economy; but certainly the
authority of Solomon is not to be questioned. I wonder where I shall
find a glass retort large enough to contain such a vast quantity of
tinder, the consumption of which must, undoubtedly, raise the price of
paper, or where shall I find animal heat sufficient even to warm such a
mass?” Slyboot informed him, that he might have a retort blown for him
as big as a church: and, that the easiest method of raising the vapour
by animal heat, would be to place it in the middle of an infirmary for
feverish patients, who might be upon mattresses around and in contact
with it. He had he sooner pronounced these words, than Wagtail
exclaimed in a rapture, “An admirable expedient, as I hope to be saved!
I will positively put it in practice.”

This simplicity of the physician furnished excellent diversion for the
company, who, in their turns, sneered at him in ironical compliments,
which his vanity swallowed as the genuine sentiments of their hearts.
Mr. Chatter, impatient of so long a silence, now broke out and
entertained us with a catalogue of all the people who danced at the
last Hampstead assembly, with a most circumstantial account of the
dress and ornaments of each, from the lappets of the ladies to the
shoe-buckles of the men; concluding with telling Bragwell, that his
mistress Melinda was there, and seemed to miss him: and soliciting his
company at the next occasion of that kind.

“No, d—mm,” said Bragwell, “I have something else to mind than dangling
after a parcel of giddy-headed girls; besides, you know my temper is so
unruly, that I am apt to involve myself in scrapes when a woman is
concerned. The last time I was there, I had an affair with Tom
Trippit.” “Oh! I remember that!” cried Banter; “You lugged out before
the ladies; and I commend you for so doing, because you had an
opportunity of showing your manhood without running any risk.” “Risk!”
said the other with a fierce countenance, “d—n my blood! I fear no
risks. I an’t afraid of lugging out against any man that wears a head,
d—me! ’Tis well known that I have drawn blood more than once, and lost
some too; but what does that signify?” The player begged this champion
to employ him as his second the next time he intended to kill, for he
wanted to see a man die of a stab, that he might know how to act such
an art the more naturally on the stage. “Die!” replied the hero: “No,
by G—! I know better things than to incur the verdict of a Middlesex
jury—I should look upon my fencing-master to be an ignorant son of a
b—h, if he had not taught me to prick any of my antagonist’s body that
I please to disable.” “Oho!” cried Slyboot, “if that be the case, I
have a favour to ask. You must know I am employed to paint a Jesus on
the cross; and my purpose is to represent him at that point of time
when the spear is thrust into his side. Now I should be glad if you
would, in my presence, pink some impertinent fellow into convulsions,
without endangering his life, that I may have an opportunity of taking
a good clever agony from nature: the doctor will direct you where to
enter and how far to go, but pray let it be as near the left side as
possible.” Wagtail, who took this proposal seriously, observed, that it
would be a very difficult matter to penetrate into the left side of the
thorax without hurting the heart, and in consequence killing the
patient; but he believed it was possible for a man of a very nice hand
and exact knowledge of anatomy, to wound the diaphragma somewhere about
the skirts, which might induce a singultus, without being attended with
death: that he was ready to demonstrate the insertion of that muscle to
Mr. Bragwell; but desired to have no concern with the experiment, which
might essentially prejudice his reputation, in case of a miscarriage.
Bragwell was as much imposed upon by the painter’s waggery as the
doctor, and declined engaging in the affair, saying he held a very
great regard for Mr. Slyboot, but had laid it down as a maxim, never to
fight except when his honour was engaged. A thousand jokes of this kind
were uttered; the wine circulated, supper was served in, we ate
heartily, returned to the bottle, Bragwell became noisy and
troublesome, Banter grew more and more severe, Ranter rehearsed,
Slyboot made faces at the whole company, I sang French catches, and
Chatter kissed me with great affection; while the doctor, with a wofull
countenance, sat silent like a disciple of Pythagoras. At length, it
was proposed by Bragwell, that we should scour the hundreds, sweat the
constable, maul the watch, and then reel soberly to bed.

While we deliberated upon this expedition, the waiter came into the
room, and asked for Doctor Wagtail: when he understood he was present,
he told him there was a lady below to inquire for him, at which message
the physician started from his melancholy contemplation, and, with a
look of extreme confusion, assured the company he could not possibly be
the person wanted, for he had no connection with any lady whatever, and
bade the drawer tell her so. “For shame!” cried Banter; “would you be
so impolite as to refuse a lady a hearing? perhaps she comes for a
consultation. It must be some extraordinary affair that brings a lady
to a tavern at this time of night. Mr. Ranter, pray do the doctor’s
base-mains to the lady, and squire her hither.” The player immediately
staggered out, and returned, leading in with much ceremony, a tall
strapping wench, whose appearance proclaimed her occupation. We
received her with the utmost solemnity, and with a good deal of
entreaty she was persuaded to sit, when a profound silence ensued,
during which she fixed her eyes, with a disconsolate look, upon the
doctor, who was utterly confounded at her behaviour, and returned her
melancholy fourfold; at length, after a good many piteous sighs, she
wiped her eyes, and accosted him thus: “What! not one word of comfort?
Will nothing soften that stony heart of thine? Not all my tears! not
all my affliction! not the inevitable ruin thou hast brought upon me!
Where are thy vows, thou faithless, perjured man? Hast thou no
honour—no conscience—no remorse for thy perfidious conduct towards me?
Answer me, wilt thou at last do me justice, or must I have recourse to
heaven or hell for my revenge?” If poor Wagtail was amazed before she
spoke, what must his confusion be on hearing this address! His natural
paleness changed into a ghastly clay colour, his eyes rolled, his lip
trembled, and he answered in an accent not to be described, “Upon my
word, honour, and salvation, madam, you are actually mistaken in my
person. I have a most particular veneration for your sex, and, am
actually incapable of injuring any lady in the smallest degree, madam;
besides, madam, to the best of my recollection, I never had the honour
of seeing you before, as I hope to be saved, madam!” “How, traitor!”
cried she, “dost thou disown me then? Mistaken! no, too well I know
that fair bewitching face! too well I know that false enchanting
tongue! Alas! gentlemen, since the villain compels me by his
unkindness, to expose myself and him, know that this betrayer, under
the specious pretence of honourable addresses, won my heart, and taking
advantage of his conquest, robbed me of my virgin treasure, and
afterwards abandoned me to my fate! I am now four months gone with
child by him, turned out of doors by my relations, and left a prey to
misery and want! Yes, thou barbarian,” said she, turning to Wagtail,
“thou tiger, thou succubus! too well thou knowest my situation. But I
will tear out thy faithless heart, and deliver the world from such a
monster.” So saying, she sprang forward at the doctor, who with
incredible agility, jumped over the table, and ran behind Bragwell,
while the rest of us endeavoured to appease the furious heroine.
Although everybody in the company affected the utmost surprise, I could
easily perceive it was a scheme concerted among them to produce
diversion at the doctor’s expense, and being under no concern about the
consequence, I entered into the confederacy, and enjoyed the distress
of Wagtail, who with tears in his eyes begged the protection of the
company, declaring himself as innocent of the crime laid to his charge
as the foetus in utero; and hinting at the same time, that nature had
not put it in his power to be guilty of such a trespass. “Nature!”
cried the lady, “there was no nature in the case; he abused me by the
help of charms and spells; else how is it possible that any woman could
have listened to the addresses of such a scarecrow? Were these owlish
eyes made for ogling; that carrion complexion to be admired; or that
mouth, like a horse-shoe, to be kissed? No, no, you owe your success to
your philtres, to your drugs and incantations; and not to your natural
talents, which are, in every respect, mean and contemptible.”

The doctor thought he had got an opportunity of vindicating himself
effectually; and desired the complainant to compose herself but for
half-an-hour, in which he undertook to prove the absurdity of believing
in the power of incantations, which were only idle dreams of ignorance
and superstition. He accordingly pronounced a very learned discourse
upon the nature of ideas, the power and independence of the mind, the
properties of stimulating medicines, the difference between a proneness
to venery, which many simples would create, and a passion limited to
one object, which can only be the result of sense and reflection; and
concluded with a pathetic remonstrance, setting forth his unhappiness
in being persecuted with the resentment of a lady whom he had never
injured, nor even seen before that occasion, and whose faculties were,
in all likelihood, so much impaired by her misfortunes that an innocent
person was in danger of being ruined by her disorder. He had no sooner
finished his harangue, than the forlorn princess renewed her
lamentations, and cautioned the company against his eloquence, which,
she said, was able to bias the most impartial bench in Christendom.
Ranter advised him to espouse her immediately, as the only means to
save his reputation, and offered to accompany him to the Fleet for that
purpose; but Slyboot proposed that a father should be purchased for the
child, and a comfortable alimony settled on the mother. Ranter promised
to adopt the infant gratis. Wagtail was ready to worship him for his
generosity, and, though he persisted in protesting his innocence,
condescended to everything rather than his unblemished character should
be called into question. The lady rejected the proposal, and insisted
on matrimony. Bragwell took up the cudgels for the doctor, and
undertook to rid him of her importunity for half-a-guinea; upon which
Wagtail, with great eagerness, pulled out his purse, and put it into
the hand of his friend, who, taking half a piece out of it, gave it to
the plaintiff, and bade her thank God for her good fortune. When she
had received this bounty, she affected to weep, and begged, since the
physician had renounced her, he would at least vouchsafe her a parting
kiss; this he was prevailed upon to grant with great reluctance, and
went up with his usual solemnity to salute her, when she laid hold of
his cheek with her teeth, and held fast, while he roared with anguish,
to the unspeakable diversion of all present. When she thought proper to
release him, she dropped a low courtesy to the company, and quitted the
room, leaving the doctor in the utmost horror, not so much on account
of the pain, as the apprehension of the consequence of the bite; for,
by this time, he was convinced of her being mad. Banter prescribed the
actual cautery, and put the poker in the fire to be heated, in order to
sear the place. The player was of opinion that Bragwell should scoop
out the part affected with the point of his sword; but the painter
prevented both these dreadful operations by recommending a balsam he
had in his pocket, which never failed to cure the bite of a mad dog; so
saying, he pulled out a small bladder of black paint, with which he
instantly anointed not only the sore, but the greatest part of the
patient’s face, and left it in a frightful condition. In short, the
poor creature was so harassed with fear and vexation, that I pitied him
extremely, and sent him home in a chair, contrary to the inclination of
everybody present.

This freedom of mine gave umbrage to Bragwell, who testified his
displeasure by swearing a few threats, without making any application;
which, being perceived by Slyboot, who sat by me, he, with a view of
promoting a quarrel, whispered to me, that he thought Bragwell used me
very ill, but every man was the best judge of his own affairs. I
answered aloud, that I would neither suffer Mr. Bragwell nor him to use
me ill with impunity; and that I stood in no need of his counsel in
regard to the regulation of my conduct. He thought proper to ask a
thousand pardons, and assure me he meant no offence; while Bragwell
feigned himself asleep, that he might not be obliged to take notice of
what passed. But the player, who had more animal spirits and less
discretion than Slyboot, unwilling to let the affair rest where he had
dropped it, jogged Mr. Bragwell and told him softly that I had called
him names, and threatened to cudgel him. This particular I understood
by his starting, up and crying, “Blood and wounds, you lie! No man
durst treat me so ignominiously. Mr. Random, did you call me names, and
threaten to drub me?” I denied the imputation, and proposed to punish
the scoundrel who endeavoured to foment disturbance in the company.
Bragwell signified his approbation, and drew his sword; I did the same,
and accosted the actor in these words: “Lookee, Mr. Ranter; I know you
possess all the mimicry and mischievous qualities of an ape, because I
have observed you put them all in practice more than once to-night, on
me and others; now I want to see if you resemble one in nimbleness
also; therefore, I desire you leap over this sword without hesitation.”
So saying, I held it parallel to the horizon, at the distance of about
three feet from the floor, and called, “Once-twice-thrice—and away!”
but, instead of complying with my demand, he snatched his hat and
hanger, and, assuming the looks, swagger, and phrase of Pistol, burst
out into the following exclamation, “Ha! must I then perform inglorious
prank of sylvan ape in mountain forest caught! Death rock me asleep,
abridge my doleful days, and lay my head in fury’s lap—Have we not
Hiren here?” This buffoonery did not answer his expectation, for, by
this time, the company was bent on seeing him in a new character. Mr.
Banter desired me to hold my sword a foot or two higher, that he might
have the better opportunity of exerting himself. The painter told him,
if he performed well, he would recommend him as a vaulter to the
proprietors of Sadler’s Wells; and Bragwell crying, “Leap for the
King!” applied the point of his sword to the player’s posteriors with
such success, that he sprang over in a trice, and, finding the door
unguarded, vanished in a twinkling; glad, no doubt, of having paid his
share of the reckoning so easily.

It being now near two o’clock in the morning, we discharged the bill,
and sallied out into the street. The painter slunk away without taking
his leave. Billy Chatter, being unable to speak or stand, was sent to a
bagnio; and Banter and I accompanied Bragwell to Moll King’s
coffee-house, where after he had kicked half a dozen hungry whores, we
left him asleep on a bench, and directed our course towards
Charing-cross, near which place both he and I lodged.

The natural dryness of my companion being overcome by liquor, he
honoured me by the way with many compliments and professions, of
friendship, for which I made suitable acknowledgments, and told him I
thought myself happy in having, by my behaviour, removed the
unfavourable opinion he entertained of me at first sight. He was
surprised at this declaration, and begged me to explain myself; upon
which I mentioned what I had overheard him say of me to Wagtail in the
coffee-house. He laughed, and made an apology for his freedom, assuring
me, that my appearance had very much prepossessed him in my favour; and
what he said was only intended as a joke on the doctor’s solemnity. I
was highly pleased at being undeceived in this particular, and not a
little proud of the good opinion of this wit, who shook me by the hand
at parting, and promised to meet me the next day at the ordinary.




CHAPTER XLVII


Strap communicates to me a conquest he had made of a Chandler’s
Widow—finds himself miserably mistaken—I go to the Opera—admire
Melinda—am cautioned by Banter—go to the Assembly at Hampstead—dance
with that young lady—receive an insolent message from Bragwell, whose
mettle is soon cooled—am in favour with my Mistress, whom I visit next
day, and am bubbled out of eighteen guineas at cards—Strap triumphs at
my success, but is astonished at my expense—Banter comes to my lodging,
is very sarcastic at my expense, and borrows five guineas from me, as a
proof of his friendship


In the morning, before I got up, Strap came into my chamber, and,
finding me awake, hemmed several times, scratched his head, cast his
eyes upon the ground, and, with a very foolish kind of simper upon his
face gave me to understand he had something to communicate. “By your
countenance,” said I, “I expect to hear good tidings.” “Indifferently,”
replied he, tittering, “that is, hereafter as it shall be. You must
know, I have some thoughts of altering my condition.” “What!” cried I,
astonished, “a matrimonial scheme? O rare Strap! thou hast got the
heels of me at last.” “N—no less, I assure you,” said he, bursting into
a laugh of self-approbation: “a tallow chandler’s widow that lives hard
by, has taken a liking to me, a fine jolly dame, as plump as a
partridge. She has a well-furnished house, a brisk trade, and a good
deal of the ready. I may have her for the asking. She told a friend of
mine, a brother footman, that she would take me out of a stinking
clout. But I refused to give my final answer, till I knew your opinion
of the matter.” I congratulated Monsieur d’Estrapes upon his conquest,
and approved of the scheme, provided he could be assured of those
circumstances of her fortune; but advised him to do nothing rashly, and
give me an opportunity of seeing the lady before matters should be
brought to a conclusion. He assured me he would do nothing without my
consent and approbation, and that very morning, while I was at
breakfast, introduce his inamorata to my acquaintance. She was a short
thick woman, about the age of thirty-six, and had a particular
prominence of belly, which I perceived at first sight, not without some
suspicion of foul play. I desired her, however, to sit, and treated her
with a dish of tea; the discourse turning on the good qualities of
Strap, whom I represented as a prodigy of sobriety, industry and
virtue. When she took her leave, he followed her to the door, and
returned licking his lips, and asking if I did not think she was a
luscious creature. I made no mystery of my apprehension, but declared
my sentiments of her without reserve; at which he was not surprised,
telling me he had observed the same symptom, but was informed by his
friend that she was only livergrown and would in few months be as small
in the waist as ever. “Yes,” said I, “a few weeks, I believe, will do
the business. In short, Strap, it is my opinion, that you are
egregiously imposed upon; and that this friend is no other than a
rascal who wants to palm his trull upon you for a wife, that he may at
once deliver himself from the importunities of the mother and the
expense of her bantling; for which reason I would not have you trust
implicitly to the report he makes of her wealth, which is inconsistent
with his behaviour, nor run your head precipitately into a noose, that
you may afterwards wish exchanged for the hangman’s.” He seemed very
much startled at my insinuation, and promised to look twice before he
leaped; saying, with some heat, “Odds, if I find his intention is to
betray me, we shall see which of us is the better man.” My prediction
was verified in less than a fortnight, her great belly producing an
infant, to the unspeakable amazement of Strap, who was before this
happened, inclinable to believe I had refined a little too much in my
penetration. His false friend disappeared; and a few days after an
execution was issued against her goods and household furniture, which
were seized by the creditors.

Meanwhile I met my friend Banter at the ordinary, and in the evening
went to the Opera with him and Mr Chatter, who pointed out Melinda in
one of the boxes, and offered to introduce me to her, observing at the
same time, that she was a reigning toast worth ten thousand pounds.
This piece of information made my heart bound with joy, and I
discovered great eagerness to accept the proposal; upon which he
assured me I should dance with her at the next assembly, if he had any
influence in that quarter: so saying, he went round, spoke to her some
minutes, and, as I imagined, pointed at me; then returning, told me, to
my inexpressible pleasure, that I might depend upon what he had
promised, for she was now engaged as my partner. Banter in a whisper,
gave me to understand that she was an incorrigible coquette, who would
grant the same favour to any young fellow in England of a tolerable
appearance, merely to engage him among the herd of her admirers, that
she might have the pleasure of seeing them daily increase; that she was
of a cold insensible disposition, dead to every passion but vanity, and
so blind to merit, that he would lay any wager the wealthiest fool
would carry her at last. I attributed a good deal of this intelligence
to the satirical turn of my friend, or resentment for having himself
suffered a rebuff from the lady in question, and, at any rate, trusted
so much to my own accomplishments as to believe no woman could resist
the ardour of my addresses.

Full of this confidence I repaired to Hampstead in company with Billy
Chatter, my Lord Hobble, and Doctor Wagtail. There I saw a very
brilliant assembly, before whom I had the honour to walk a minuet with
Melinda, who charmed me with her frank manner and easiness of
behaviour. Before the country dances began, I received a message by a
person I did not know from Bragwell, who was present, importing that
nobody who knew him presumed to dance with Melinda while he was there
in person, that I would do well to relinquish her without noise,
because he had a mind to lead up a country dance with her. This
extraordinary intimation, which was delivered in the lady’s hearing,
did not at all discompose me, who, by this time, was pretty well
acquainted with the character of my rival. I therefore, without the
least symptom of concern bade the gentleman tell Mr. Bragwell, that
since I was so happy as to obtain the lady’s consent, I should not be
solicitous about his; and desired the bearer himself to bring me no
such impertinent messages for the future. Melinda, affected a sort of
confusion, and pretended to wonder that Mr. Bragwell should give
himself such liberties with regard to her, who had no manner of
connection with the fellow. I laid hold of this opportunity to display
my valour, and offered to call him to an account for his insolence, a
proposal which she absolutely refused, under pretence of consulting my
safety; though I could perceive, by the sparkling of her eyes, that she
would not have thought herself affronted by being the subject of a
duel. I was by no means pleased with this discovery of her thoughts,
which not only argued the most unjustifiable vanity, but likewise the
most barbarous indifference; however, I was allured by her fortune, and
resolved to gratify her pride, in making her the occasion of a public
quarrel between me and Bragwell, who, I was pretty certain, would never
drive matters to a dangerous extremity.

While we danced together, I observed this formidable rival at one end
of the room, encircled with a cluster of beaux, to whom he talked with
great vehemence, casting many big looks at me from time to time. I
guessed the subject of his discourse, and as soon as I had handed my
partner to her seat, strutted up to the place where he stood, and,
cocking my hat in his face, demanded aloud, if he had anything to say
to me. He answered with a sullen tone, “Nothing, at present, sir;” and
turned about upon his heel. “Well,” said I, “you know where I am to be
found at any time.” His companions stared at one another, and I
returned to the lady, whose features brightened at my approach, and
immediately a whisper ran through the whole room; after which so many
eyes were turned upon me that I was ready to sink with confusion. When
the ball broke up, I led her to her coach, and, like a true French
gallant, would have got up behind it, in order to protect her from
violence on the road, but she absolutely refused my offer, and
expressed her concern that there was not an empty seat for me within
the vehicle.

Next day, in the afternoon, I waited on her at her lodgings, by
permission, in company with Chatter, and was very civilly received by
her mother, with whom she lived. There were a good many fashionable
people present, chiefly young fellows, and immediately after tea, a
couple of card tables were set, at one of which I had the honour to
play with Melinda, who in less than three hours, made shift to plunder
me of eight guineas. I was well enough content to lose a little money
with a good grace, that I might have an opportunity in the meantime to
say soft things, which are still most welcome when attended with good
luck; but I was by no means satisfied of her fair play, a circumstance
that shocked me not a little, and greatly impaired my opinion of her
disinterestedness and delicacy. However, I was resolved to profit by
this behaviour, and treat her in my turn with less ceremony;
accordingly, I laid close siege to her, and, finding her not at all
disgusted with the gross incense I offered, that very night made a
declaration of love in plain terms. She received my addresses with
great gaiety, and pretended to laugh them off, but at the same time
treated me with such particular complacency that I was persuaded I had
made a conquest of her heart, and concluded myself the happiest man
alive. Elevated with these flattering ideas, I sat down again to cards
after supper, and with great cheerfulness suffered myself to be cheated
of ten guineas more.

It was late before I took my leave, after being favoured with a general
invitation; and, when I got into bed, the adventures of the day
hindered me from sleeping. Sometimes I pleased myself with the hopes of
possessing a fine woman with ten thousand pounds; then I would ruminate
on the character I had heard of her from Banter, and compare it with
the circumstances of her conduct towards me, which seemed to bear too
great a resemblance to the picture he had drawn. This introduced a
melancholy reflection on the expense I had undergone, and the smallness
of my funds to support it, which, by-the-by, were none of my own. In
short, I found myself involved in doubts and perplexities, that kept me
awake the greatest part of the night.

In the morning, Strap, with whom I had not conversed for two days,
presented himself with the utensils for shaving me; upon which, I asked
his opinion of the lady he had seen me conduct to her coach at
Hampstead. “Odds! she’s a delicious creature!” cried he, “and, as I am
informed, a great fortune. I am sorry you did not insist on going home
with her. I dare say, she would not have refused your company; for she
seems to be a good-humoured soul.” “There’s a time for all things,”
said I, “you must know, Strap, I was in company with her till one
o’clock this morning.” I had no sooner pronounced these words than he
began to caper about the room, and snap his fingers, crying in a
transport, “The day’s our own—the day’s our own!” I gave him to
understand that his triumph was a little premature, and that I had more
difficulties to surmount than he was aware of; then I recounted to him
the intelligence I had received from Banter. At which he changed
colour, shook his head, and observed there was no faith in woman. I
told him I was resolved to make a bold push notwithstanding, although I
foresaw it would lead me into a great expense; and bade him guess the
sum I had lost last night at cards. He scratched his chin, and
protested his abhorrence of cards, the very name of which being
mentioned, made him sweat with vexation, as it recalled the
money-dropper to his remembrance. “But, however,” said he, “you have to
do with other guess people now. Why, I suppose, if you had a bad run
last night, you would scarce come off for less than ten or twelve
shilling.” I was mortified at this piece of simplicity, which I
imagined, at that time, was all affected by way of reprimand for my
folly; and asked with some heat if he thought I had spent the evening
in a cellar with chairmen and bunters; giving him to know, at the same
time, that my expense had amounted to eighteen guineas.

It would require the pencil of Hogarth to express the astonishment and
concern of Strap on hearing this piece of news; the basin, in which he
was preparing the lather for my chin, dropped out of his hands, and he
remained some time immovable in that ludicrous attitude, with his mouth
open, and his eyes thrust forward considerably beyond their station;
but, remembering my disposition, which was touchy, and impatient of
control, he smothered his chagrin, and attempted to recollect himself.
With this view he endeavoured to laugh, but in spite if his teeth,
broke out in a whimper, took up his wash-ball and pewter-pot, scrubbed
my beard with the one, and discharged the other upon my face. I took no
notice of this confusion, but after he had fully recovered himself, put
him in mind of his right, and assured him of my readiness to surrender
my effects whenever he should think proper to demand them. He was
nettled at my insinuation, which he thought proceeded from my distrust
of his friendship; and begged I would never talk to him in that strain
again, unless I had a mind to break his heart.

This good creature’s unalterable friendship for me affected me with the
most grateful sentiments, and acted as a spur to my resolution of
acquiring a fortune, that I might have it in my power to manifest my
generosity in my turn. For this purpose, I determined to bring matters
to a speedy conclusion with Melinda; well knowing that a few such
nights as the last would effectually incapacitate me from prosecuting
that or any other advantageous amour.

While my meditation was busied in planning out my future conduct, Mr.
Banter favoured me with a visit, and after breakfast asked how I had
passed the preceding evening. I answered I was very agreeably
entertained at a private house. “Yes,” said he, with a sarcastic smile,
“you deserve something extraordinary for the price you paid.” I was
surprised at this remark, and pretended ignorance of his meaning.
“Come, come, Mr. Random,” continued he, “you need not make a mystery of
it to me; the whole town has it. I wish that foolish affair between you
and Bragwell at Hampstead had been less public. It has set all the
busybodies at work to find out your real character and situation; and
you cannot imagine what conjectures have already circulated at your
expense. One suspects you to be a Jesuit in disguise; another thinks
you are an agent from the Pretender; a third believes you to be an
upstart gamester, because nobody knows anything of your family or
fortune; a fourth is of opinion that you are an Irish fortune-hunter.”
This last hypothesis touched me so nearly that, to conceal my
confusion, I was fain to interrupt his detail, and damn the world for
an envious meddling community, that would not suffer a gentleman to
live without molestation. He took no notice of this apostrophe, but
went on. “For my own part, I neither know nor desire to know who or
what you are. This I am certain of, that few people make a mystery of
their origin or situation, who can boast of anything advantageous in
either; and my own opinion of the matter is that you have raised
yourself, by your industry, from nothing to the appearance you now
maintain, and which you endeavour to support by some matrimonial
scheme.” Here he fixed his eyes steadfastly upon me and perceiving my
face covered with blushes, told me, how he was confirmed in his
opinion. “Look ye, Random,” said he, “I have divined your plan, and am
confident it will never succeed. You are too honest and too ignorant of
the town to practise the necessary cheats of your profession, and
detect the conspiracies that will be formed against you. Besides, you
are downright bashful. What the devil! set up for a fortune hunter
before you have conquered the sense of shame! Perhaps you are entitled
by your merit, and I believe you are, to a richer and a better wife
than Melinda; but take my word for it, she is not to be won at that
rate;—or, if you are so lucky as to carry her, between you and me, you
may say, as Teague said, By my soul, I have gained a loss! She would
take care to spend her fortune in a twinkling, and soon make you sick
of her extravagance.”

I was alarmed by his discourse, while I resented the freedom of it, and
expressed my disgust by telling him, he was mistaken in my intentions,
and desiring he would give me leave to regulate my conduct according to
the dictates of my own reason. He made no apology for the liberty he
had taken, and ascribed it to the warmth of his friendship for me; as
an uncommon instance of which he borrowed five guineas, assuring me
there were very few people in the world whom he would so far favour
with his confidence. I gave him the money, and professed myself so well
convinced of his sincerity, that he had no occasion to put it to such
extraordinary proofs for the future. “I thought,” said he, “to have
asked five pieces more, but hearing you were bubbled of eighteen last
night, I presumed you might be out of cash, and resolved to model my
demand accordingly.” I could not help admiring the cavalier behaviour
of this spark, of whom I desired to know his reason for saying I was
bubbled. He then gave me to understand, that before he came to my
lodgings, he had beat up Tom Tossle, who, being present, informed him
of the particulars, rehearsed all the fine things I said to Melinda,
with which he proposed to entertain the town, and among other
circumstances, assured him my mistress cheated with so little art, that
nobody but a mere novice could be imposed upon.

The thoughts of becoming a subject of raillery for coxcombs, and losing
my money to boot, stung me to the quick; but I made a virtue of my
indignation, and swore that no man should with impunity either asperse
the character of Melinda, or turn my behaviour into ridicule. He
replied in a dry manner, that I would find it a Herculean task to
chastise everybody who should laugh at my expense; and, as for the
character of Melinda, he did not see how it could suffer by what was
laid to her charge; for that cheating at cards, far from being reckoned
a blemish among people of fashion, was looked upon as an honourable
indication of superior genius and address. “But let us waive this
subject,” said he, “and go to the coffee-house, in order to make a
party for dinner.”




CHAPTER XLVIII


We repair to the coffee-house, where we overhear a curious dispute
between Wagtail and Medlar, which is referred to our decision—the
Doctor gives an account of his experiment—Medlar is roasted by Banter
at the ordinary—the old gentleman’s advice to me


Being as willing to drop the theme as he was to propose it, I
accompanied him thither, where we found Mr. Medlar and Dr. Wagtail
disputing upon the word Custard, which the physician affirmed should be
spelt with a G, observing that it was derived from the Latin verb
gustare, “to taste;” but Medlar pleaded custom in behalf of C,
observing, that, by the Doctor’s rule, we ought to change pudding into
budding, because it is derived from the French word boudin; and in that
case why not retain the original orthography and pronunciation of all
the foreign words we have adopted, by which means our language would
become a dissonant jargon without standard or propriety? The
controversy was referred to us; and Banter, notwithstanding his real
opinion to the contrary, decided it in favour of Wagtail; upon which
the peevish annuitant arose, and uttering the monosyllable pish! with
great emphasis, removed to another table.

We then inquired of the doctor, what progress he had made in the
experiment of distilling tinder-water; and he told us he had been at
all the glass-houses about town, but could find nobody who would
undertake to blow a retort large enough to hold the third part of the
quantity prescribed; but he intended to try the process on as much as
would produce five drops, which would be sufficient to prove the
specific, and then he would make it a parliamentary affair; that he had
already purchased a considerable weight of rags, in reducing which to
tinder, he had met with a misfortune, which had obliged him to change
his lodgings; for he had gathered them in a heap on the floor, and set
fire to them with a candle, on the supposition that the boards would
sustain no damage, because it is the nature of flame to ascend; but, by
some very extraordinary accident, the wood was invaded, and began to
blaze with great violence, which disordered him so much, that he had
not the presence of mind enough to call for assistance, and the whole
house must have been consumed with him in the midst of it, had not the
smoke that rolled out of the windows in clouds alarmed the
neighbourhood, and brought people to his succour: that he had lost a
pair of black velvet breeches and a tie-wig in the hurry, besides the
expense of the rags, which were rendered useless by the water used to
quench the flame, and the damage of the floor, which he was compelled
to repair; that his landlord, believing him distracted, had insisted on
his quitting his apartment at a minute’s warning, and he was put to
incredible inconvenience; but now he was settled in a very comfortable
house, and had the use of a large paved yard for preparing his tinder;
so that he hoped in a very short time to reap the fruits of his labour.

After having congratulated the doctor on his prospect, and read the
papers, we repaired to an auction of pictures, where we entertained
ourselves an hour or two; from thence we adjourned to the Mall, and,
after two or three turns, went back to dinner, Banter assuring us, that
he intended to roast Medlar at the ordinary; and, indeed, we were no
sooner set than this cynic began to execute his purpose, by telling the
old gentleman that he looked extremely well, considering the little
sleep he had enjoyed last night. To this compliment Medlar made no
reply, but by a stare, accompanied with a significant grin; and Banter
went on thus; “I don’t know whether most to admire the charity of your
mind, or the vigour of your body. Upon my soul, Mr. Medlar, you do
generous things with the best taste of any man I know! You extend your
compassion to real objects, and exact only such returns as they are
capable of making. You must know, gentlemen,” said he, turning to the
company, “I had been up most part of the night with a friend who is ill
of a fever, and, on my return home this morning, chanced to pass by a
gin shop still open, whence issued a confused sound of mirth and
jollity: upon which, I popped in my head, and perceived Mr. Medlar
dancing bareheaded in the midst of ten or twenty ragged bunters, who
rejoiced at his expense. But indeed, Mr. Medlar, you should not
sacrifice your constitution to your benevolence. Consider, you grow old
apace; and, therefore, have a reverend care of your health, which must
certainly be very much impaired by these nocturnal expeditions.” The
testy senior could no longer contain himself, but cried hastily, “’Tis
well known that your tongue is no slanderer.” “I think,” said the
other, “you might spare that observation, as you are very sensible,
that my tongue has done you signal service on many occasions. You may
remember, that, when you made your addresses to the fat widow who kept
a public-house at Islington, there was a report spread very much to the
prejudice of your manhood, which coming to the ears of your mistress,
you were discarded immediately: and I brought matters to a
reconciliation, by assuring her you had three bastards at nurse in the
country. How you ruined your own affair afterwards, it is neither my
business nor inclination to relate.”

This anecdote, which had no other foundation than in Banter’s own
invention, afforded a good deal of mirth to everybody present, and
provoked Mr. Medlar beyond all sufferance; so that he started up in a
mighty passion, and, forgetting that his mouth was full, bespattered
those who sat next to him, while he discharged his indignation in a
volley of oaths, and called Banter insignificant puppy, impertinent
jackanapes, and a hundred such appellations; telling the company he had
invented these false and malicious aspersions, because he would not
lend him money to squander away upon rooks and whores. “A very likely
story,” said Banter, “that I should attempt to borrow money of a man
who is obliged to practise a thousand shifts to make his weekly
allowance hold out till Saturday night. Sometimes he sleeps
four-and-twenty hours at a stretch, by which means he saves three
meals, besides coffee-house expense. Sometimes he is fain to put up
with bread and cheese and small beer for dinner; and sometimes he
regales on twopennyworth of ox cheek in a cellar.” “You are a lying
miscreant!” cried Medlar, in an ecstacy of rage; “I can always command
money enough to pay your tailor’s bill, which I am sure is no trifle;
and I have a good mind to give you a convincing proof of my
circumstances, by prosecuting you for defamation, sirrah.” By this time
the violence of his wrath had deprived him of his appetite, and he sat
silent, unable to swallow one mouthful, while his tormentor enjoyed his
mortification, and increased his chagrin, by advising him to lay in
plentifully for his next day’s fast.

Dinner being ended, we came down stairs to the coffee room, and Banter
went away to keep an appointment, saying, he supposed he should see
Wagtail and me in the evening at the Bedford Coffee-house. He was no
sooner gone than the old gentleman took me aside, and said, he was
sorry to see me so intimate with that fellow, who was one of the most
graceless rakes about town, and had already wasted a good estate and
constitution upon harlots; that he had been the ruin of many a young
man, by introducing them into debauched company, and setting a lewd
example of all manner of wickedness; and that, unless I were on my
guard, he would strip me in a short time both of my money and
reputation. I thanked him for his information, and promised to conduct
myself accordingly, wishing, however, his caution had been a few hours
more early, by which means I might have saved five guineas.
Notwithstanding this intelligence, I was inclinable to impute some part
of the charge to Medlar’s revenge for the liberties taken with him at
dinner; and therefore, as soon as I could disengage myself, applied to
Wagtail for his opinion of the character in question, resolved to
compare their accounts, allowing for the prejudice of each, and to form
my judgment upon both, without adhering strictly to either. The doctor
assured me, that he was a very pretty gentleman of family and fortune;
a scholar, a wit, a critic, and perfectly well acquainted with the
town; that his honour and courage were unquestionable, though some
extravagances he had been guilty of, and his talents for satire had
procured him enemies, and made some people shy of his acquaintance.
From these different sketches, I concluded that Banter was a young
fellow of some parts, who had spent his fortune, but retained his
appetites, and fallen out with the world, because he could not enjoy it
to his wish.

I went to the Bedford Coffee-house in the evening, where I met my
friends, from thence proceeded to the play, and afterwards carried them
home to my lodgings, where we supped in great good humour.




CHAPTER XLIX


I receive a Challenge—the Consequence of it—the Quarrel being made up,
am put in Arrest by the Care and Affection of Strap—but immediately
released upon explaining my Affair—the Behaviour of Mr. Oregan and his
two Friends—I visit Melinda, whom I divert with an account of the
Duel—propose Marriage—she refers the Matter to her Mother, of whom I
make a solemn Demand of her Daughter—the old Lady’s behaviour—I am
discarded—-resent their Disdain


When I was ready to go abroad next day, Strap brought me a letter, To
Mr. Random, Esq., these; which, upon opening, I found contained a
challenge conceived in these very extraordinary terms:

“Sir,—Whereas I am informed that you make love to Miss Melinda
Goosetrap, this is to let you know that she is under promise of
marriage to me; and that I am at this present waiting at the back of
Montague House, with a pair of good pistols in my hand; and if you will
keep your appointment, I will make your tongue confess (after the
breath is out of your body) that you do not deserve her so well as


Yours, etc.
Rourk Oregan.”


I guessed, from the style and superscription of this billet, that my
rival was a true Milesian, and was not a little uneasy at the contents;
especially that part, in which he asserted his right to my mistress by
promise, a circumstance I did not not know how to reconcile to her good
sense and penetration. However, this was no time for me to decline the
defiance, because the success of my addresses in a great measure
depended upon my behaviour in that affair. I therefore immediately
loaded my pistols, and betook myself in a hackney coach to the place
appointed, where I found a tall raw-boned man, with a hard-featured
countenance and black bushy beard, walking by himself, wrapped up in a
shabby green coat, over which his own hair descended in leathern queue
from his head, that was covered with a greasy hat trimmed with a
tarnished pointe d’Espagne. He had no sooner perceived me advancing
than he pulled a pistol from his bosom, and, presenting it at me,
snapped it without the least preamble. Alarmed at this rude salutation,
I made a stand, and, before he could adjust his other piece, fired one
of mine at him, without doing any damage, By this time he was ready
with his second, that flashed in the pan without going off; upon which
he called, with a true Tipperary cadence, “Fire away, honey!” and began
to hammer his flint with great deliberation. But I was resolved to make
use of the advantage fortune had given me, and therefore stepped up
without throwing away my fire, desiring him to ask his life, or prepare
for another world; but this stout Hibernian refused to condescend, and
complained bitterly of my having quitted my ground before he could
return my shot: saying I ought to go back to my station, and let him
have an equal chance with me. I endeavoured to persuade him that I had
given him a double chance already: and it was my business to prevent
him from enjoying a third; but now, since I had an opportunity, I
demanded a parley, and desired to know his condition and reason for
calling me to the field, who, to the best of my remembrance, far from
having done him any injury, had never before seen him. He told me that
he was a gentleman of fortune, who had spent all he had, and, hearing
that Melinda had got ten thousand pounds, he intended to make himself
master of that sum by espousing her, and he was determined, in an
honourable way, to cut the throats of all those who stood between him
and his hopes.

I then demanded to know the foundation of his hopes; and now that I had
seen him, being more and more astonished at the circumstance of the
promise, desired that he would explain that mystery. He gave me to
understand, that he trusted entirely to his birth and personal merit;
that he had frequently written to Melinda, setting forth his claim and
pretensions, but she was never kind enough to send an answer, or even
to admit him into her presence; and that the promise he mentioned in
his letter was made by his friend Mr. Gahagan, who assured him that no
woman could resist a man of his appearance. I could not forbear
laughing to excess at the simplicity of my rival, who did not seem to
relish my mirth, but began to be very serious: upon which I endeavoured
to appease him, by giving him my word and honour that, far from
prejudicing his addresses to the lady, I would represent him to her in
the most favourable light I could with any regard to truth; but he must
not be surprised if she should remain blind to his deserts, for nothing
was more capricious than a woman’s mind, and the affection of that sex
was seldom purchased with virtue alone. That my declaration might have
the better effect, I took notice of his deshabille, and, professing
sorrow at seeing a gentleman reduced, slipped two guineas into his
hand, at sight of which he threw away his pistols, and hugging me in
his arms, cried, “Arrah, by Jasus, now, you are the best friend I have
met with these seven long years!” When I had suffered some minutes in
his embrace, he quitted me, and picking up his rusty arms, wished the
devil might burn him if ever he should give me any further trouble
about womankind.

The quarrel being thus amicably composed, I begged leave to look at his
pistols, which I found so crazy and so foul, that I believe it was
happy for him neither of them was discharged, for one of them would
certainly have split in the going off, and he would, in all
probability, have lost his hand in the explosion; but what gave me a
lively idea of the man’s character was, to find, upon examination, that
one of them had been loaded without being primed, and the other primed
without a charge.

While we walked home together, I expressed a desire of knowing my new
friend’s history; and he informed me of his having served in the German
army as a volunteer against the Turks; that for his behaviour at the
siege of Belgrade, he had been honoured with an ensign’s commission,
and afterwards promoted to the rank of lieutenant, in which station it
was his misfortune to affront his captain, who challenged him to the
field, and was killed in the duel, upon which he was obliged to
retreat; that he had been in England some years soliciting his friends
for provision in the British army; but being hitherto unsuccessful, was
desired by Mr. Gahagan to turn his thoughts to matrimony, and make his
fortune by an advantageous match; in consequence of which advice, he
had made up to Melinda: and, having heard by means of an Irish footman
in the family, that I was her chief favourite, had called me out in
hopes of removing by my death the greatest obstruction to his desires;
but now he was convinced of my honour and generosity, he swore by the
blessed Virgin, he would think of her no more, if there were not
another woman in the world. As a further proof of his veracity, which I
did not at all doubt, he opened an old iron snuff-box, and pulled out
his commission in the Imperial army, and his captain’s challenge, which
he preserved as testimonials of his character. I was so well convinced
of this poor man’s honesty and courage, that I determined to speak in
his behalf to some of my acquaintance, who might recommend his case to
the consideration of those who could provide for him; and in the
meantime to accommodate him with a few clothes, by which his appearance
would be much mended, and himself enabled to renew his solicitations in
person.

As we walked along conversing socially together, we were met by a file
of musketeers, and Strap at their head, who no sooner approached than,
with a frantic look, he cried, “Seize them! In the name of God seize
them!” We were accordingly surrounded, and I put in arrest by the
corporal, who was commanding officer; but Captain Oregan disengaged
himself, and ran with such speed towards Tottenham Court Road that he
was out of sight in a moment. When my arms were delivered up, and
myself secured, Strap became a little more composed, and asked pardon
for the liberty he had taken, which he hoped I would excuse, as it
proceeded from his affection. He then told me that, suspecting the
letter (which by the by was brought by the author himself) contained
something extraordinary, he had peeped through the keyhole, and seen me
load my pistols; upon which he ran down to Whitehall, and applied to
the officer on guard for a party to put me in arrest, but before he
returned, I was gone in a coach; that he had inquired which way I went,
and, having heard that duels were commonly fought at the back of
Montague House, he conducted the guard to this place, where he thanked
God for having found me safe and sound. I gave him to understand that I
forgave his officious concern for once, but cautioned him in pretty
severe terms for making me the subject of idle conversation for the
future; then turning to the corporal, thanked him for his care, and
gave him a crown to drink with his men, assuring him that the rencontre
was over long before he came up, and everything compromised, as he
might have observed by our behaviour; as a farther proof of which, he
would find upon examination that one of my pistols had been discharged:
but this civil person, without giving himself or me any farther
trouble, received the bounty with a thousand bows and acknowledgments,
and, returning the pistols, released me immediately.

He was not gone a hundred yards, when my friend Oregan came up in order
to rescue me, with two tatterdemalions, whom he had engaged for that
purpose about the purlieus of St. Giles’s. One of them was armed with a
musket that wanted a lock, and another with a rusty broadsword, but
their dress surpassed all description. When he understood I was already
free he made an apology for his abrupt departure, and introduced me to
his two companions: First, to Counsellor Fitzclabber, who, he told me,
was then employed in compiling a history of the kings of Minster, from
Irish manuscripts; and then to his friend Mr. Gahagan, who was a
profound philosopher and politician, and had projected many excellent
schemes for the good of his country. But it seems these literati had
been very ill rewarded for their ingenious labours; for, between them
both, there was but one shirt, and half a pair of breeches. I thanked
them very kindly for their readiness to assist me, and, having offered
my service in my turn, bade them good morrow, desiring Oregan to
accompany me to my lodgings, where he was fitted with decent clothes
from my wardrobe, so much to his satisfaction, that he swore eternal
gratitude and friendship to me, and, at my request, recounted all the
adventures of his life.

In the afternoon, I waited on Melinda, who received me with great
kindness and familiarity, and laughed excessively at my adventure with
the Irishman, to whose wishes she was no stranger, having more than a
dozen letters in her possession, which he had written to her on the
subject of love, and which, for my entertainment, she submitted to my
perusal. Having made ourselves merry at the expense of this poor
admirer, I seized the opportunity of her mother’s going out of the
room, and introduced my own passion, which I recommended to her with
all the ardour and eloquence I was master of. I flattered, sighed,
swore, entreated, and acted a thousand extravagancies, in hopes of
making some impression on her heart; but she heard everything I said
without discovering the least emotion; and other company came in before
she would vouchsafe one serious reply. After tea, the cards were
brought in according to custom, and it was my good fortune to have
Melinda for my partner; by which means, instead of losing, I came off
with five guineas clear gain.

I soon became acquainted with a good many people of fashion, and spent
my time in the modish diversions of the town, such as plays, operas,
masquerades, drums, assemblies, and muppet-shows; chiefly in company
with Melinda, whom I cultivated with all the eagerness and address that
my prospect could inspire, and my education afford. I spared neither my
person nor my purse to gratify her vanity and pride; my rivals were
intimidated, and indeed outshone; and, after all, I began to fear that
the dear creature had not a heart to lose.

At last, finding myself unable to support the expense of this amour
much longer, I was determined to bring the matter to a crisis; and one
evening, while we were together by ourselves, complained of her
indifference, described the tortures of suspense to a love-sick mind,
and pressed her to disclose her sentiments of matrimony and me with
such earnestness, that she could not, with all her art, shift the
subject, but was obliged to come to an eclaircissement. She told me,
with a careless air, that she had no objection to my person, and if I
could satisfy her mother in other particulars, I should not find her
averse to the match; but she was resolved to do nothing in such a
momentous concern without the advice and consent of her parent. This
was no very agreeable declaration to me, whose aim had been to win her
inclination first, and then secure my conquest by a private marriage,
to which I flattered myself she would express no reluctance. That I
might not, however, desert my cause before it was desperate, I waited
on her mother; and, with great formality, demanded the daughter in
marriage. The good lady, who was a very notable woman, behaved with
great state and civility; thanked me for the honour I intended her
family; and said, she did not doubt that I was in all respects
qualified to make a woman happy; but it concerned her as a parent
anxious about the welfare of her child, to inquire into the particulars
of my fortune, and know what settlement I proposed to make. To this
intimation, which would have utterly disconcerted me if I had not
expected it, I replied, without hesitation that, though my fortune was
very small, I was a gentleman by birth and education, would maintain
her daughter in the sphere of a gentlewoman, and settle her own dowry
on her and her heirs for ever. This careful matron did not seem to
relish my proposal, but observed, with a demure countenance, that there
was no necessity for settling that upon her child which was her own
already; however, if I pleased, her lawyer should confer with mine upon
the matter; and, in the meantime, she desired I would favour her with a
perusal of my rent-roll. Notwithstanding the vexation I was under, I
could scarce forbear laughing in her face at the mention of my
rent-roll, which was indeed a severe piece of satire upon my
pretensions. I frankly owned I had no landed estate; and told her that
I could not exactly specify the sum I was master of, until I had
regulated my affairs, which were at present in some disorder; but that
I would take an opportunity of satisfying her on that head very soon.

It was not long before I took my leave, and returned to my lodgings in
a very melancholy mood, persuaded that I had nothing more to expect
from that quarter. I was confirmed in this opinion next day, when I
went back with a view of explaining myself more fully to the old
gentlewoman; and was told by the footman that his ladies were not at
home, although I had seen Melinda through the blinds at a parlour
window, as I went up to the door. Incensed at this affront, I quitted
the door without saying one word, and as I repassed the parlour, bowed
to Miss, who still remained in the same situation, securely screened,
as she thought, from my view.

This disappointment gave me more uneasiness on Strap’s account than my
own, for I was in no danger of dying for love of Melinda; on the
contrary, the remembrance of my charming Narcissa was a continual check
upon my conscience during the whole course of my addresses; and perhaps
contributed to the bad success of my scheme, by controlling my raptures
and condemning my design.

There was a necessity for informing my companion of everything that
happened to me and I performed this piece of duty in an affected
passion, swearing I would be his pack-horse no longer, and desiring him
to take the management of his affairs into his own hands. This finesse
had the desired effect, for, instead of grumbling over my miscarriage,
Strap was frightened at the passion I feigned, and begged me, for the
love of God, to be appeased; observing that, although we had suffered a
great loss, it was not irreparable; and if Fortune frowned to day, she
might perhaps smile to-morrow. I pretended to acquiesce in his remarks,
praise his equanimity, and promised to improve my misfortune. He, on
the other hand, pretended to be perfectly well satisfied with my
conduct, and conjured me to follow the dictates of my own reflection;
but, in spite of all his affectation, I could perceive his inward
affliction, and his visage sensibly increased in longitude from that
day.




CHAPTER L


I long to be revenged on Melinda—apply to Banter for his Assistance—he
contrives a scheme for that purpose—which is put in Execution with
great Success—I make an Attempt upon the Heart of Miss Gripewell, but
am disappointed—grow melancholy at my Disappointment, and have recourse
to the Bottle—receive a Billet-doux—am ravished with the Contents—find
myself involved in Intrigue, which I imagined would make my Fortune—am
confounded at my mistake, which banishes all Thoughts of Matrimony


In the meantime, my attention was wholly engrossed in search of another
mistress, and the desire of being revenged on Melinda, in both which
schemes I was very much assisted by Billy Chatter, who was such a
necessary creature among the ladies, that in all private dances he
engaged the men. To him therefore I applied, desiring he would
introduce me to a partner of some figure, at the next private assembly,
for the sake of a frolic, the intention of which I would afterwards
communicate. Billy, who had heard something of a difference between
Melinda and me, immediately smoked part of my design, and, thinking I
only wanted to alarm her jealousy a little, promised to gratify my
desire, by matching me with a partner worth thirty thousand pounds,
whom the ladies of this end of the town had lately taken under their
management and protection. Upon further inquiry, I found this person’s
name was Miss Biddy Gripewell; that her father, who had been a
pawnbroker, died intestate, by which means all his substance descended
to his daughter, who was so little a favourite that, could the old man
have prevailed with his own rapacious disposition to part with as much
money as would have paid the expense of a will, she would not have
inherited the sixth part of his fortune; that during his life, far from
being educated in a way suitable to such great expectations, she was
obliged to live like a servant wench, and do the most menial offices in
the family. But his funeral was no sooner performed, than she assumed
the fine lady, and found so many people of both sexes to flatter,
caress, and instruct her, that, for want of discretion and experience,
she was grown insufferably vain and arrogant, and pretended to no less
than a duke or earl at least for her husband; that she had the
misfortune to be neglected by the English quality, but a certain poor
Scottish lord was then making interest to be introduced to her
acquaintance. In the meantime, she was fallen into the hands of a
notable lady, who had already disposed of her to a lieutenant of foot,
a distant relation of her ladyship’s, though Miss as yet knew nothing
of the affair; and lastly that if I proposed to dance with her, I must
give him leave to represent me as a knight, or foreign count at least.
I was ravished at this piece of information, and consented for one
night, to personate a French marquis, that I might the easier fulfil my
revenge.

Having made the appointment with Chatter I went to Banter’s lodgings,
as I had by this time conceived a great opinion of his penetration and
knowledge; and, after I had enjoined secrecy, told him every
circumstance of my disgrace with Melinda, and imparted the plan I had
projected to mortify that proud coquette, desiring his advice in
proving, and assistance in executing the scheme. Nothing could be more
agreeable to his misanthropical temper than an account of her behaviour
and my resentment: he applauded my resolution, and proposed that I
should not only provide myself with a proper partner, but also procure
such a one for Miss Goosetrap, as should infallibly entail upon her the
ridicule of all her acquaintance. For this purpose he mentioned his
barber who he said, was an exceeding coxcomb lately come from Paris,
whose absurd affectation and grimace, would easily pass upon her for
the sprightly politesse of a gentleman improved by travel. I hugged him
for this hint; and he assured me it would be no difficult matter to
make him believe, that Melinda, having seen him by accident, was
captivated by his appearance, and begged for his acquaintance. He
actually engaged him on this pretence, and painted his good fortune in
such colours that the poor shaver was quite beside himself with joy. He
was immediately fitted with a tawdry suit of clothes belonging to
Banter, and by him recommended to Chatter as a very pretty fellow, just
returned from his travels. Master Billy, who acted as a gentleman usher
to a great many of the fair sex in and about town, undertook at once to
bespeak Melinda in his behalf; and everything happened according to my
wish.

At the time appointed I appeared dressed to the best advantage; and, in
the character of a Marquis, had the honour of opening the ball with the
rich heiress, who attracted the eyes of the whole company by the
prodigious number of jewels with which she was adorned. Among others I
perceived Melinda, who could not more conceal her envy than
astonishment at my success; her curiosity was still more flagrant and
tormenting, for she had never seen Miss Gripewell before; and Chatter,
who alone could give her any satisfaction on that head, was engaged in
conversation at the other end of the room. I observed her impatience,
and exulted in her chagrin; and after my partner was set, took the
opportunity of passing by her to make a slight bow without stopping,
which completed my triumph and her indignation. She changed colour,
bridled up, assumed an air of disdain, and flirted her fan with such a
fury, that it went to pieces in a moment, to the no small entertainment
of those who sat near and observed her.

At length the metamorphosed barber took her out, and acted his part
with such ridiculous extravagance that the mirth of the whole company
was excited at his expense, and his partner was so much ashamed that,
before the country dances began, she retired in great confusion, under
pretence of being taken suddenly ill, and was followed by her gallant,
who no doubt imagined her indisposition was nothing but love; and laid
hold of the occasion of conducting her home, to comfort her, with an
assurance of his entertaining a reciprocal passion. They were no sooner
gone than an inquisitive whisper of “Who is he?” ran round the room;
and Chatter could give them no other intelligence about him than that
he was a man of fortune just returned from his travels. I, who alone
was acquainted with his real quality, affected ignorance well knowing
that female curiosity would not rest satisfied with such a general
account, and that the discovery would proceed with a better grace from
anybody than me.

Meanwhile, I was tempted by the richness of the prize to practise upon
Miss Gripewell’s heart, but soon found it too well fortified with pride
and indifference to yield to any efforts in my own character, and I
neither would nor could preserve the title I had borrowed longer than
that night.

As I expected, everything came to light next day. The barber, in pure
simplicity of heart, detected himself to Melinda, and discovered the
foundation of his hopes; she sickened at the affront, and was ashamed
to show her face in public for many weeks after this accident. Poor
Chatter found it impossible to justify himself to her satisfaction; was
in utter disgrace with Miss Gripewell, for having imposed me upon her
as a nobleman; and suffered very much in his character and influence
among the ladies in general.

Finding my finances diminished more than one-half, and my project as
little advanced as on the first day of my arrival in town, I began to
despair of my success, and grew melancholy at the prospect of
approaching want. To dispel the horrors of this fiend I had recourse to
the bottle, and kept more company than ever. I became particularly
attached to the playhouse, conversed with the actors behind the scenes,
grew acquainted with a body of templars, and in a short time commenced
a professed wit and critic. Indeed, I may say, without vanity, that I
was much better qualified than any one of my companions, who were,
generally speaking, of all the creatures I ever conversed with, the
most ignorant and assuming. By means of these avocations I got the
better of care, and learned to separate my ideas in such a manner that,
whenever I was attacked by a gloomy reflection, I could shove it aside,
and call in some agreeable reverie to my assistance. This was not the
case with Strap, who practised a thousand shifts to conceal the sorrow
that preyed upon his carcass, and reduced him to the resemblance of a
mere skeleton.

While I thus posted, in a thoughtless manner, towards poverty, I one
day received, by the penny post, a letter written in a woman’s hand,
containing a great many high-flown compliments, warm protestations of
love, couched in a very poetical style, an earnest desire of knowing
whether or not my heart was engaged, by leaving an answer at a certain
place, directed to R. B., and the whole subscribed “Your incognita.” I
was transported with joy on reading the contents of this billet-doux,
which I admired as a masterpiece of tenderness and elegance, and was
already up to my ears in love with the author, whom my imagination
represented as a lady of fortune, in the bloom of youth and beauty.
Elevated with this conjecture, I went to work, and exhausted my
invention in composing an answer suitable to the sublimity of her style
and the ardour of her sentiments. I expressed my admiration of her wit
in terms the most hyperbolical, and while I acknowledged myself
unworthy of her regard, declared myself enamoured of her understanding;
and in the most pathetic manner implored the honour of an interview.
Having finished this performance, and communicated it to Strap, who
skipped about for joy, I dispatched him with it to the place appointed,
which was the house of a milliner not far from Bond Street, and desired
him to keep watch near the door for some time, that he might discover
the person who should call for it. In less than an hour he returned
with a joyful countenance, and told me that, soon after he had
delivered the letter, a chairman was called, to whom it was given, with
directions to carry it to the house of a rich gentleman in the
neighbourhood, whither he (Strap) followed him, and saw him put it into
the hands of a waiting-woman, who paid the messenger, and shut the
door; that, upon inquiry at an alehouse hard by, where he called for a
pint of beer, he understood the gentleman to whom the house belonged
had an only daughter, very handsome, who would inherit his whole
estate; and who certainly was the author of the billet I had received.
I was of the same opinion, and, hugging myself in the happy prospect,
dressed immediately, and passed in great state the house that contained
my unknown admirer. Nor was my vanity disappointed; for I perceived a
beautiful young creature standing at one of the windows of the
dining-room, who, I imagined, observed me with more than common
curiosity. That I might indulge her view, and at the same time feast my
own, I affected to stop, and gave orders to Strap, in the street, just
opposite to her station, by which means I had an opportunity of seeing
her more distinctly, and of congratulating myself on having made a
conquest of so much perfection. In a few moments she retired, and I
betook myself to the ordinary in a rapture of hope, which deprived me
of my appetite for that meal, and sent me home in the evening to
indulge my contemplation.

Early next day, I was favoured with another epistle from my unknown
admirer, signifying her unutterable joy at the receipt of mine, which,
while it made a tender of my heart, convinced her of the value of it.
Above all things, she professed her extreme pleasure in finding me so
much attached to her understanding, a circumstance that not only
flattered her in the most sensible part, but at the same time argued my
own sagacity. As for the interview I desired, she assured me, that I
could not be more eager for such an occasion than she; but she must not
only sacrifice a little more to decorum, but be satisfied of my
honourable intentions, before she could grant that request. Meanwhile
she gave me to understand that, although she might owe some deference
to the opinion of certain persons, she was resolved, in an affair that
so nearly concerned her happiness, to consult her own inclination,
preferable to the advice of the whole world; especially as she was
urged to such condescension by no consideration of fortune, what she
depended upon being her own without restriction or control. Struck with
admiration at the philosophy and self-denial of my mistress, who seemed
insensible of the beauty she possessed, and in particular ravished with
that piece of intelligence by which I learned her fortune was
independent; I resumed the pen, launched out into encomiums on the
dignity of her sentiments, affected to undervalue the charms of
external beauty, pretended to ground my passion on the qualities of her
mind, complained of her rigour in sacrificing my repose to an
overscrupulous regard to decorum, and declared the purity of my designs
in the most solemn and pathetic vows. This performance being sealed and
directed, was sent to the place appointed by Strap, who, that we might
be still the more confirmed in our belief, renewed his watch, and in a
little time brought back the same information as before, with this
addition, that Miss Sparkle (the name of my correspondent), looking out
at the window, no sooner saw the messenger arrive, than she shut the
casement in a sort of beautiful confusion, and disappeared, eager no
doubt to hear from the dear object of her love.

My doubts now vanished, the long-expected port appeared, and I looked
upon myself as perfectly secure of that happiness I had been in quest
of so long. After dinner, I sauntered in company with Dr. Wagtail, to
that part of the town in which my inamorata lived; and, as he was a
mere register, inquired of him into the name, character, and fortune of
everybody who possessed a good house in the streets through which we
passed. When it came to his turn to mention Sir John Sparkle, he
represented him as a man of an immense estate and narrow disposition,
who mewed up his only child, a fine young lady, from the conversation
of mankind, under the strict watch and inspection of an old governante,
who was either so honest, envious, or insatiable, that nobody had been
as yet able to make her a friend, or get access to her charge, though
numbers attempted it every day; not so much on account of her
expectations from her father, who, being a widower, might marry again
and have sons, as for a fortune of twelve thousand pounds left her by
an uncle, of which she could not be deprived. This piece of news,
exactly tallying with the last part of the letter I had been honoured
with in the morning, had such an effect on me, that any man except
Wagtail might have observed my emotion; but his attention was too much
engrossed by the contemplation of his own importance to suffer him to
be affected with the deportment of any other body, unless it happened
to be so particular that he could not help taking notice of it.

When I had disengaged myself from him, whose conversation grew insipid
to me, I went home, and made Strap acquainted with the fruit of my
researches. This faithful squire was almost choked with transport, and
even wept with joy; but whether on account of himself or me, I shall
not pretend to determine. Next day a third billet-doux was brought to
me, containing many expressions of tenderness, mingled with some
affecting doubts about the artifice of man, the inconstancy of youth,
and the jealousy often attending the most sincere passion; withal
desiring I would excuse her, if she should try me a little longer,
before she declared herself beyond the power of retracting. These
interesting scruples added fuel to my flame and impatience to my hope;
I redoubled my complaints of her indifference, and pressed her to an
assignation with such fervent entreaties, that in a few days she
consented to meet me at the house of that milliner who had forwarded
all my letters. During the interval between the date of her promise and
the hour of appointment, my pride soared beyond all reason and
description; I lost all remembrance of the gentle Narcissa, and my
thoughts were wholly employed in planning triumphs over the malice and
contempt of the world.

At length the happy hour arrived. I flew to the place of rendezvous,
and was conducted into an apartment, where I had not waited ten
minutes, when I heard the rustling of silk, and the sound of feet
ascending the stairs; my heart took the alarm, and beat quick; my
cheeks glowed, my nerves thrilled, and my knees shook with ecstacy! I
perceived the door opening, saw a gold brocade petticoat advance, and
sprang forward to embrace my charmer. Heaven and earth! how shall I
paint my situation, when I found Miss Sparkle converted into a wrinkled
hag turned of seventy! I was struck dumb with amazement, and petrified
with horror! This ancient Urganda, perceived my disorder, and,
approaching with a languishing air, seized my hand, asking in a
squeaking tone, if I was indisposed. Her monstrous affectation
completed the disgust I had conceived for her at her first appearance,
and it was a long time before I could command myself so much as to
behave with common civility: at length, however, I recollected myself,
and pronounced an apology for my behaviour, which I said proceeded from
a dizziness that seized me all of a sudden. My hoary Dulcinea, who, no
doubt, had been alarmed at my confusion, no sooner learned the cause to
which I now ascribed it, than she discovered her joy in a thousand
amorous coquetries, and assumed the sprightly airs of a girl of
sixteen. One while she ogled me with her dim eyes, quenched in rheum;
then, as if she was ashamed of that freedom, she affected to look down,
blush, and play with her fan; then toss her head that I might not
perceive a palsy that shook it, ask some childish questions with a
lisping accent, giggle and grin with her mouth shut to conceal the
ravage of time upon her teeth, leer upon me again, sigh piteously,
fling herself about in her chair to show her agility, and act a great
many more absurdities that youth and beauty can alone excuse. Shocked
as I was at my disappointment, my disposition was incapable of
affronting any person who loved me; I therefore endeavoured to put a
good face to the matter for the present, resolved to drop the whole
affair as soon as I should get clear of her company; with this view, I
uttered some civil things, and in particular desired to know the name
and condition of the lady who had honoured me so much. She told me her
name was Withers, that she lived with Sir John Sparkle in quality of
governess to his only daughter, in which situation she had picked up a
comfortable sufficiency to make her easy for life; that she had the
pleasure of seeing me at church, where my appearance and deportment
made such an impression upon her heart, that she could enjoy no ease
until she had inquired into my character, which she found so amiable in
all respects, that she yielded to the violence of her inclination, and
ventured to declare her passion with too little regard perhaps to the
decorum of her sex; but she hoped I would forgive a trespass of which I
myself was in some measure the cause, and impute her intrusion to the
irresistible dictates of love. No decayed rake ever swallowed a bolus
with more reluctance than I felt in making a reply suitable to this
compliment, when, instead of the jewel, I found the crazy casket only
in my power; and yet my hopes began to revive a little, when I
considered, that, by carrying on the appearance of an intrigue with the
duenna, I might possibly obtain access to her charge. Encouraged by
this suggestion, my temper grew more serene, my reserve wore off, I
talked en cavalier, and even made love to this antiquated coquette, who
seemed extremely happy in her adorer, and spread all her allurements to
make her imagined conquest more secure. The good woman of the house
treated us with tea and sweetmeats, and afterwards withdrew, like a
civil experienced matron as she was.

Left thus to our mutual endearments, Miss Withers (for she was still a
maiden) began to talk of matrimony, and expressed so much impatience in
all her behaviour that, had she been fifty years younger, I might
possibly have gratified her longing without having recourse to the
church; but this step my virtue as well as interest forbade. When the
inclinations of an old maid settle upon a young fellow, he is
persecuted with her addresses; but, should he once grant her the
favour, he will never be able to disentangle himself from her
importunities and reproaches. It was my business to defer the ceremony
as long as possible, under the most specious pretences, with a view of
becoming acquainted with Miss Sparkle in the meantime; and I did not
despair of success, when I considered, that in the course of our
correspondence, I should, in all probability, be invited to visit my
mistress in her own apartment, and by these means have an opportunity
of conversing with her charming ward. Pleased with this prospect, my
heart dilated with joy; I talked in raptures to the state governante,
and kissed her shrivelled hand with great devotion, She was so much
transported with her good fortune, that she could not contain her
ecstacy, but flew upon me like a tigress, and pressed her skinny lips
to mine; when (as it was no doubt concerted by her evil genius) a dose
of garlic she had swallowed that morning, to dispel wind, I suppose,
began to operate with such a sudden explosion, that human nature,
circumstanced as I was, could not endure the shock with any degree of
temper. I lost all patience and reflection, flung away from her in an
instant, snatched my hat and cane, and ran downstairs as if the devil
had me in pursuit, and could scarcely retain the convulsion of my
bowels, which were grievously offended by the perfume that assaulted
me. Strap, who waited my return with impatience, seeing me arrive in
the utmost disorder, stood motionless with apprehension, and durst not
inquire into the cause.

After I had washed my mouth, more than once, and recruited my spirits
with a glass of wine, I recounted to him every particular of what had
happened; to which he made no other reply for some time than lifting up
his eyes, clasping his hands, and uttering a hollow groan. At length he
observed, in a melancholy tone, that it was a thousand pities my organs
were so delicate as to be offended with the smell of garlic. “Ah! God
help us,” said he, “’tis not the steams of garlic, no, nor of something
else, that would give me the least uneasiness—see what it is to be a
cobler’s son!” I replied hastily, “I wish then you would go and
retrieve my miscarriage.” At this suggestion he started, forced a
smile, and left the room, shaking his head. Whether the old gentlewoman
resented my abrupt departure so much that her love changed into
disdain, or was ashamed to see me on account of her infirmity, I know
not; but I was never troubled again with her passion.




CHAPTER LI


I cultivate an Acquaintance with two Noblemen—am introduced to earl
Strutwell—his kind Promise and Invitation—the Behaviour of his Porter
and Lacquey—he receives me with an Appearance of uncommon
Affection—undertakes to speak in my Behalf to the Minister—informs me
of his Success, and wishes me Joy—introduces a Conversation about
Petronius Arbiter—falls in Love with my Watch, which I press upon him—I
make a present of a Diamond Ring to Lord Straddle—impart my good
Fortune to Strap and Banter, who disabuses me, to my utter
Mortification


Baffled hitherto in my matrimonial schemes, I began to question my
talents for the science of fortune-hunting, and to bend my thoughts
towards some employment under the government. With the view of
procuring which, I cultivated the acquaintance of Lords Straddle and
Swillpot, whose fathers were men of interest at court. I found these
young noblemen as open to my advances as I could desire; I accompanied
them in their midnight rambles, and often dined with them at taverns,
where I had the honour of paying the reckoning.

I one day took the opportunity, while I was loaded with protestations
of friendship, to disclose my desire of being settled in some sinecure,
and to solicit their influence in my behalf. Swillpot, squeezing my
hand, said, I might depend upon his service by G—. The other swore that
no man would be more proud than he to run my errands. Encouraged by
these declarations, I ventured to express an inclination to be
introduced to their fathers, who were able to do my business at once.
Swillpot frankly owned he had not spoken to his father these three
years; and Straddle assured me, his father, having lately disobliged
the minister by subscribing his name to a protest in the house of
peers, was thereby rendered incapable of serving his friends at
present; but he undertook to make me acquainted with Earl Strutwell,
who was hand and glove with a certain person who ruled the roast. This
offer I embraced with many acknowledgments, and plied him so closely,
in spite of a thousand evasions, that he found himself under a
necessity of keeping his word, and actually carried me to the levee of
this great man, where he left me in a crowd of fellow-dependents, and
was ushered to a particular closet audience; from whence, in a few
minutes, he returned with his lordship, who took me by the hand,
assured me he would do me all the service he could, and desired to see
me often. I was charmed with my reception, and, although I had heard
that a courtier’s promise is not to be depended upon, I thought I
discovered so much sweetness of temper and candour in this earl’s
countenance, that I did not doubt of finding my account in his
protection. I resolved therefore to profit by this permission, and
waited on him next audience day, when I was favoured with a particular
smile, squeeze of the hand, and a whisper, signifying that he wanted
half-an-hour’s conversation with me in private, when he should be
disengaged, and for that purpose desired me to come and drink a dish of
chocolate with him to-morrow morning.

This invitation, which did not a little flatter my vanity and
expectation, I took care to observe, and went to his lordship’s house
at the time appointed. Having rapped at the gate, the porter unbolted
and kept it half open, placing himself in the gap, like soldiers in the
broach, to dispute my passage. I asked if his lord was stirring? He
answered with a surly aspect, “No.” “At what hour does he commonly
rise?” said I. “Sometimes sooner, sometimes later,” said he, closing
the door upon me by degrees. I then told him I was come by his
lordship’s own appointment, to which intimation this Cerberus replied,
“I have received no orders about the matter,” and was upon the point of
shutting me out, when I recollected myself all of a sudden, and
slipping a crown into his hand, begged as a favour that he would
inquire, and let me know whether or not the earl was up. The grim
janitor relented at the touch of my money, which he took with all the
indifference of a taxgatherer, and showed me into a parlour, where, he
said, I might amuse myself till such time as his lord should be awake.
I had not sat ten minutes in this place, when a footman entered, and,
without speaking, started at me; I interpreted this piece of his
behaviour into, “Pray, sir, what is your business?” and asked the same
question I had put to the porter, when I accosted him first. The
lacquey made the same reply, and disappeared before I could get any
further intelligence. In a little time he returned, on pretence of
poking the fire, and looked at me again with great earnestness; upon
which I began to perceive his meaning, and, tipping him with
half-a-crown, desired he would be so good as to fall upon some method
of letting the earl know that I was in the house. He made a low bow,
said, “Yes, sir,” and vanished. This bounty was not thrown away, for in
an instant he came back, and conducted me to a chamber, where I was
received with great kindness and familiarity by his lordship, whom I
found just risen, in his morning-gown, and slippers. After breakfast,
he entered into a particular conversation with me about my travels, the
remarks I had made abroad, and examined me to the full extent of my
understanding. My answers seemed to please him very much, he frequently
squeezed my hand, and, looking at me with a singular complacency in his
countenance, bade me depend upon his good offices with the ministry in
my behalf. “Young men of your qualifications,” said he, “ought to be
cherished by every administration. For my own part, I see so little
merit in the world, that I have laid it down as a maxim, to encourage
the least appearance of genius and virtue to the utmost of my power:
you have a great deal of both; and will not fail of making a figure one
day, if I am not mistaken; but you must lay your account with mounting
by gradual steps to the summit of your fortune. Rome was not built in a
day. As you understand the languages perfectly well, how would you like
to cross the sea as secretary to an embassy?” I assured his lordship,
with great eagerness, that nothing could be more agreeable to my
inclination: upon which he bade me make myself easy, my business was
done, for he had a place of that kind in his view. This piece of
generosity affected me so much, that I was unable for some time to
express my gratitude, which at length broke out in acknowledgments of
my own unworthiness, and encomiums on his benevolence. I could not even
help shedding tears at the goodness of this noble lord, who no sooner
perceived them than he caught me in his arms, and hugged and kissed me
with a seemingly paternal affection. Confounded at this uncommon
instance of fondness for a stranger, I remained a few moments silent
and ashamed; then rose and took my leave, after he had assured me that
he would speak to the minister in my favour that very day; and desired
that I would not for the future give myself the trouble of attending at
his levee, but come at the same hour every day, when he should be at
leisure, that is, three times a week.

Though my hopes were now very sanguine, I determined to conceal my
prospect from everybody, even from Strap, until I should be more
certain of success: and in the meantime give my patron no respite from
my solicitations. When I renewed my visit, I found the street-door
opened to me as if by enchantment; but in my passage towards the
presence-room, I was met by the valet-de-chambre, who cast some furious
looks at me the meaning of which I could not comprehend. The earl
saluted me at entrance with a tender embrace, and wished me joy of his
success with the Premier, who, he said, had preferred his
recommendation to that of two other noblemen very urgent in behalf of
their respective friends, and absolutely promised that I should go to a
certain foreign court in quality of secretary to an ambassador and
plenipotentiary who was to set out in a few weeks an affair of vast
importance to the nation. I was thunderstruck with my good fortune, and
could make no other reply than kneel and attempt to kiss my
benefactor’s hand, which submission he would not permit; but, raising
me up, pressed me to his breast with surprising emotion, and told me he
had now taken upon himself the care of making my fortune. What enhanced
the value of the benefit still the more, was his making light of the
favour, and shifting the conversation to another subject.

Among other topics of discourse, that of the Belles Lettres was
introduced, upon which his lordship held forth with great taste and
erudition and discovered an intimate knowledge of the authors of
antiquity, “Here’s a book,” said he, taking one from his bosom,
“written with great elegance and spirit; and, though the subject may
give offence to some narrow-minded people, the author will always be
held in esteem by every person of wit and learning.” So saying, he put
into my hand Petronius Arbiter, and asked my opinion of his wit and
manner. I told him, that, in my opinion, he wrote with great ease and
vivacity, but was withal so lewd and indecent that he ought to find no
quarter or protection among people of morals and taste. “I own,”
replied the earl, “that his taste in love is generally decried, and
indeed condemned by our laws; but perhaps that may be more owing to
prejudice and misapprehension than to true reason and deliberation. The
best man among the ancients is said to have entertained that passion;
one of the wisest of their legislators has permitted the indulgence of
it in his commonwealth; the most celebrated poets have not scrupled to
avow it. At this day it prevails not only over all the East, but in
most parts of Europe; in our own country, it gains ground apace, and in
all probability will become in a short time a more, fashionable vice
than simple fornication. Indeed there is something to be said in
vindication of it; for, notwithstanding the severity of the law against
offenders in this way, it must be confessed that the practice of this
passion is unattended with that curse and burthen upon society which
proceeds from a race of miserable and deserted bastards, who are either
murdered by their parents, deserted to the utmost want and
wretchedness, or bred up to prey upon the commonwealth: and it likewise
prevents the debauchery of many a young maiden, and the prostitution of
honest men’s wives; not to mention the consideration of health, which
is much less liable to be impaired in the gratification of this
appetite, than in the exercise of common venery, which, by ruining the
constitutions of our young men, has produced a puny progeny that
degenerates from generation to generation. Nay, I have been told, that
there is another motive perhaps more powerful than all these, that
induces people to cultivate this inclination; namely, the exquisite
pleasure attending its success.”

From this discourse I began to be apprehensive that his lordship,
finding I had travelled, was afraid I might have been infected with
this spurious and sordid desire abroad, and took this method of
sounding my sentiments on the subject. Fired at this supposed
suspicion, I argued against it with great warmth, as an appetite
unnatural, absurd, and of pernicious consequence; and declared my utter
detestation and abhorrence of it in these lines of the satirist:—

Eternal infamy the wretch confound
Who planted first that vice on British ground!
A vice! That spite of nature and sense reigns,
And poisons genial love, and manhood stains.


The earl smiled at my indignation, and told me he was glad to find my
opinion of the matter so conformable to his own, and that what he had
advanced was only to provoke me to an answer, with which he professed
himself perfectly well pleased. After I had enjoyed a long audience, I
happened to look at my watch, in order to regulate my motions by it;
and his lordship, observing the chased case, desired to see the device,
and examine the exception, which he approved with some expressions of
admiration. Considering the obligations I lay under to his lordship, I
thought there could not be a fitter opportunity than the present to
manifest, in some shape, my gratitude; I therefore begged he would do
me the honour to accept of the watch as a small testimony of the sense
I had of his lordship’s generosity; but, he refused it in a peremptory
manner, and said he was sorry I should entertain such a mercenary
opinion of him; observing at the same time, that it was the most
beautiful piece of workmanship he had ever seen, and desiring to know
where he could have such another. I begged a thousand pardons for the
freedom I had taken, which I hoped he would impute to nothing else than
the highest veneration for his person—told him, that, as it came to my
hand by accident in France, I could give him no information about the
maker, for there was no name on the inside; and once more humbly
entreated that he would indulge me so far as to use it for my sake. He
was still positive in refusing it; but was pleased to thank me for my
generous offer, saying, it was a present that no nobleman need be
ashamed of receiving: though he was resolved to show his
disinterestedness with regard to me, for whom he had conceived a
particular friendship; and insisted (if I were willing to part with the
watch) upon knowing what it had cost, that he might at least indemnify
me, by refunding the money. On the other hand, I assured his lordship
that I should look upon it as an uncommon mark of distinction, if he
would take it without further question; and, rather than disoblige me,
he was at last persuaded to put it in his pocket, to my no small
satisfaction, who took my leave immediately, after having received a
kind squeeze, and an injunction to depend upon his promise.

Buoyed up with this reception, my heart opened; I gave away a guinea,
among the lacqueys, who escorted me to the door, flew to the lodgings
of Lord Straddle, upon whom I forced my diamond ring as an
acknowledgment for the great service he had done me, and from thence
hied me home, with an intent of sharing my happiness with honest Strap.
I determined, however, to heighten his pleasure, by depressing his
spirits at first, and then bringing in good news with double relish.
For this purpose, I affected the appearance of disappointment and
chagrin, and told him in an abrupt manner that I had lost the watch and
diamond. Poor Hugh, who had been already harassed into a consumption by
intelligence of this sort, no sooner heard these words, than, unable to
contain himself, he cried, with distraction in his looks, “God in
heaven forbid!” I could carry on the farce no longer; but, laughing in
his face, told him everything that had passed, as above recited. His
features were immediately unbended, and the transition was so
affecting, that he wept with joy, calling my Lord Strutwell by the
appellations of Jewel, Phoenix, Rara avis; and praising God, that there
was still some virtue left among our nobility. Our mutual
congratulations being over, we gave way to our imagination, and
anticipated our happiness by prosecuting our success through the
different steps of promotion, till I arrived at the rank of a prime
minister, and he to that of my first secretary.

Intoxicated with these ideas, I went to the ordinary, where, meeting
with Banter, I communicated the whole affair in confidence to him,
concluding with an assurance that I would do him all the service in my
power. He heard me to an end with great patience, then regarding me a
good while with a look of disdain, pronounced, “So your business is
done, you think?” “As good as done. I believe,” said I. “I’ll tell
you,” replied he, “what will do it still more effectually—a halter!
’Sdeath! if I had been such a gull to two such scoundrels as Strutwell
and Straddle, I would, without any more ado, tuck myself up.” Shocked
at this exclamation, I desired him with some confusion to explain
himself; upon which he gave me to understand that Straddle was a poor
contemptible wretch, who lived by borrowing and pimping for his
fellow-peers; that in consequence of this last capacity, he had
doubtless introduced me to Strutwell, who was so notorious for a
passion for his own sex that he was amazed his character had never
reached my ears; and that, far from being able to obtain for me the
post he had promised, his interest at court was so low, that he could
scarce provide for a superannuated footman once a year in the customs
or excise; that it was a common thing for him to amuse strangers, whom
his jackals ran down, with such assurances and caresses as he had
bestowed on me, until he had stripped them of their cash, and
everything valuable about them, very often of their chastity, and then
leave them a prey to want and infamy: that he allowed his servants no
other wages than that part of the spoil which they could glean by their
industry; and the whole of his conduct towards me was so glaring, that
nobody who knew anything of mankind could have been imposed upon by his
insinuations.

I leave the reader to judge how I relished this piece of information,
which precipitated me from the most exalted pinnacle of hope to the
lowest abyss of despondence, and well nigh determined me to take
Banter’s advice and finish my chagrin with a halter. I had no room to
suspect the veracity of my friend, because, upon recollection, I found
every circumstance of Strutwell’s behaviour exactly tallying with the
character he had described; his hugs, embraces, squeezes, and eager
looks, were now no longer a mystery; no more than his defence of
Petronius, and the jealous frown of his valet-de-chambre, who, it
seems, had been the favourite pathic of his lord.




CHAPTER LII


I attempt to recover my Watch and Jewel, but to no Purpose—resolve to
revenge myself on Strutwell by my Importunity—am reduced to my last
Guinea—obliged to inform Strap of my Necessity, who is almost
distracted with the News, but nevertheless obliged to pawn my best
Sword for present Subsistence—that small Supply being exhausted, I am
almost stupified with my Misfortunes—go to the Gaming Table by the
Advice of Banter, and come off with unexpected Success—Strap’s
Ecstacy—Mrs. Gawky waits upon me, professes Remorse for her Perfidy,
and implores my Assistance—I do myself a Piece of Justice by her Means,
and afterwards reconcile her to her Father


I was so confounded that I could make no reply to Banter, who
reproached me with great indignation for having thrown away upon
rascals that which, had it been converted into ready money, would have
supported the rank of a gentleman for some months, and enabled me, at
the same time, to oblige my friends. Stupified as I was, I could easily
divine the source of his concern, but sneaked away in a solitary
manner, without yielding the least answer to his expostulations; and
began to deliberate within myself in what manner I should attempt to
retrieve the movables I had so foolishly lost. I should have thought it
no robbery to take them again by force, could I have done it without
any danger of being detected; but, as I could have no such opportunity,
I resolved to work by finesse, and go immediately to the lodgings of
Straddle, where I was so fortunate as to find him. “My Lord,” said I,
“I have just now recollected, that the diamond I had the honour of
presenting to you is loosened a little in the socket, and there is a
young fellow just arrived from Paris, who is reckoned the best jeweller
in Europe; I knew him in France; and, if your lordship will give me
leave, will carry the ring to him to be set to rights.” His lordship
was not to be caught in this snare; he thanked me for my offer, and
told me, that, having himself observed the defect, he had sent it to
his own jeweller to be mended; and, indeed, by this time I believe it
was in the jeweller’s hands, though not in order to be mended, for it
stood in need of no alteration.

Balked in this piece of politics, I cursed my simplicity; but resolved
to play a surer game with the earl, which I thus devised. I did not
doubt of being admitted into familiar conversation with him, as before,
and hoped by some means to get the watch into my hand; then, on
pretence of winding or playing with it, drop it on the floor, when, in
all probability, the fall would disorder the work so as to stop its
motion; this event would furnish me with an opportunity of insisting
upon carrying it away in order to be repaired, and then I should be in
no hurry to bring it back. What pity it was I could not find an
occasion of putting this fine scheme in execution! When I went to renew
my visit to his lordship, my access to the parlour was as free as ever;
but after I had waited for some time, the valet-de-chambre came in with
his lord’s compliments, and a desire to see me to-morrow at his levee,
he being at present so much indisposed that he could not see company. I
interpreted this message into a bad omen, and came away muttering
curses against his lordship’s politeness, and ready to go to
loggerheads with myself for being so egregiously duped. But, that I
might have some satisfaction for the loss I had sustained, I besieged
him so closely at his levee, and persecuted him with my solicitations;
not without faint hopes, indeed, of reaping something more from my
industry than the bare pleasure of making him uneasy; though I could
never obtain another private hearing the whole course of my attendance;
neither had I resolution enough to undeceive Strap, whose looks in a
little time were so whetted with impatience, that whenever I came home,
his eyes devoured me, as it were, with eagerness of attention.

At length, however, finding myself reduced to my last guinea, I was
compelled to disclose my necessity, though I endeavoured to sweeten the
discovery by rehearsing to him the daily assurances I received from my
patron. But these promises were not of efficacy sufficient to support
the spirits of my friend, who no sooner understood the lowness of my
finances, than, uttering a dreadful groan, he exclaimed, “In the name
of God, what shall we do?” In order to comfort him, I said, that many
of my acquaintances, who were in a worse condition than we, supported,
notwithstanding, the character of gentlemen; and advising him to thank
God that as yet we had incurred no debt, proposed he should pawn my
sword of steel, inlaid with gold, and trust to my discretion for the
rest. This expedient was wormwood and gall to poor Strap, who, in spite
of his invincible affection for me, still retained notions of economy
and expense suitable to the narrowness of his education; nevertheless
he complied with my request, and raised seven pieces on the sword in a
twinkling. This supply, inconsiderable as it was, made me as happy for
the present, as if I had kept five hundred pounds in bank; for by this
time I was so well skilled in procrastinating every troublesome
reflection, that the prospect of want seldom affected me very much, let
it be ever so near. And now indeed it was nearer than I imagined. My
landlord, having occasion for money, put me in mind of my being
indebted to him five guineas in lodging; and, telling me he had a sum
to make up, begged I would excuse his importunity, and discharge the
debt. Though I could ill spare so much cash, my pride took the
resolution of disbursing it. This I did in a cavalier manner, after he
had written a discharge, telling him with an air of scorn and
resentment, I saw he was resolved that I should not be long in his
books; while Strap, who stood by, and knew my circumstances, wrung his
hands in secret, gnawed his nether lip, and turned yellow with despair.
Whatever appearance of indifference my vanity enabled me to put on, I
was thunderstruck with this demand, which I had no sooner satisfied,
than I hastened into company, with a view of beguiling my cares with
conversation, or drowning them with wine.

After dinner, a party was accordingly made in the coffee-house, from
whence we adjourned to the tavern, where, instead of sharing the mirth
of the company, I was as much chagrined at their good humour as a
damned soul in hell would be at a glimpse of heaven. In vain did I
swallow bumper after bumper! the wine had lost its effect upon me, and,
far from raising my dejected spirits, could not even lay me asleep.
Banter, who was the only intimate I had (Strap excepted), perceived my
anxiety, and, when we broke up, reproached me with pusillanimity, for
being cast down at my disappointment that such a rascal as Strutwell
could be the occasion of. I told him I did not at all see how
Strutwell’s being a rascal alleviated my misfortune; and gave him to
understand that my present grief did not so much proceed from that
disappointment, as from the low ebb of my fortune, which was sunk to
something less than two guineas. At this declaration he cried, “Psha!
is that all?” and assured me there were a thousand ways of living in
town without a fortune, he himself having subsisted many years entirely
by his wit. I expressed an eager desire of being acquainted with some
of these methods, and he, without farther expostulation, bade me follow
him. He conducted me to a house under the piazzas in Covert Garden,
which we entered, and having delivered our swords to a grim fellow who
demanded them at the foot of the staircase, ascended to the second
story, where I saw multitudes of people standing round two
gaming-tables, loaded, in a manner, with gold and silver. My conductor
told me this was the house of a worthy Scotch lord, who, using the
privilege of his peerage, had set up public gaming tables, from the
profits of which he drew a comfortable livelihood. He then explained
the difference between the sitters and the bettors; characterised the
first as old rooks, and the last as bubbles; and advised me to try my
fortune at the silver table, by betting a crown at a time. Before I
would venture anything, I considered the company more particularly, and
there appeared such a group of villanous faces, that I was struck with
horror and astonishment at the sight! I signified my surprise to
Banter, who whispered in my ear, that the bulk of those present were
sharpers, highwaymen, and apprentices, who, having embezzled their
master’s cash, made a desperate push in this place to make up their
deficiencies. This account did not encourage me to hazard any part of
my small pittance: but, at length, being teased by the importunities of
my friend, who assured me there was no danger of being ill-used,
because people were hired by the owner to see justice done to
everybody, I began by risking one shilling, and, in less than an hour,
my winning amounted to thirty. Convinced by this time of the fairness
of the game, and animated with success, there was no need of further
persuasion to continue the play: I lent Banter (who seldom had any
money in his pocket) a guinea, which he carried to the gold table, and
lost in a moment. He would have borrowed another, but finding me deaf
to his arguments, went away in a pet. Meanwhile my gain advanced to six
pieces, and my desire of more increased in proportion: so that I moved
to the higher table, where I laid half-a-guinea on every throw, and
fortune still favouring me, I became a sitter, in which capacity I
remained until it was broad day; when I found myself, after many
vicissitudes, one hundred and fifty guineas in pocket.

Thinking it now high time to retire with my booty, I asked if anybody
would take my place, and made a notion to rise; upon which an old
Gascon, who sat opposite to me, and of whom I had won a little money,
started up with fury in his looks, crying, “Restez, foutre, restez! il
faut donner moi mon ravanchio!” At the same time, a Jew, who sat near
the other, insinuated that I was more beholden to art than fortune for
what I had got; that he had observed me wipe the table very often, and
that some of the divisions appeared to be greasy. This intimation
produced a great deal of clamour against me, especially among the
losers, who threatened with many oaths and imprecations, to take me up
by a warrant as a sharper, unless I would compromise the affair by
refunding the greatest part of my winning. Though I was far from being
easy under his accusation, I relied upon my innocence, threatened in my
turn to prosecute the Jew, for defamation, and boldly offered to submit
my cause to the examination of any justice in Westminster; but they
knew themselves too well to put their characters on that issue, and
finding that I was not to be intimidated into any concession, dropped
their plea, and made way for me to withdraw. I would not, however, stir
from the table until the Israelite had retracted what he had said to my
disadvantage, and asked pardon before the whole assembly.

As I marched out with my prize, I happened to tread on the toes of a
tall raw-boned fellow, with a hooked nose, fierce eyes, black thick
eyebrows, a pigtail wig of the same colour, and a formidable hat pulled
over his forehead, who stood gnawing his fingers in the crowd, and he
sooner felt the application of my shoe heel, than he roared out in a
tremendous voice, “Blood and wounds! you son of a whore, what’s that
for?” I asked pardon with a great deal of submission, and protested I
had no intention of hurting him; but the more I humbled myself the more
he stormed, and insisted on gentlemanly satisfaction, at the same time
provoking me with scandalous names that I could not put up with; so
that I gave loose to my passion, returned his Billingsgate, and
challenged him down to the piazzas. His indignation cooling as mine
warmed, he refused my invitation, saying he would choose his own time,
and returned towards the table muttering threats, which I neither
dreaded nor distinctly heard; but, descending with great deliberation,
received my sword from the door-keeper, whom I gratified with a guinea,
according to the custom of the place, and went home in a rapture of
joy.

My faithful valet, who had set up all night in the utmost uneasiness on
my account, let me in with his face beslubbered with tears, and
followed me to my chamber, where he stood silent like a condemned
criminal, in expectation of hearing that every shilling was spent, I
guessed the situation of his thoughts, and, assuming a sullen look,
bade him fetch me some water to wash. He replied, without lifting his
eyes from the ground, “In my simple conjecture, you have more occasion
for rest, not having (I suppose) slept these four-and-twenty hours.”
“Bring me some water!” said I, in a peremptory tone; upon which he
sneaked away shrugging his shoulders. Before he returned, I had spread
my whole stock on the table in the most ostentatious manner; so that,
when it first saluted his view, he stood like one entranced; and,
having rubbed his eyes more than once, to assure himself of his being
awake, broke out into, “Lord have mercy upon us, what a vast treasure
is here!” “’Tis all our own, Strap,” said I; “take what is necessary,
and redeem the sword immediately.” He advanced towards the table,
stopped short by the way, looked at the money and me by turns, and with
a wildness in his countenance, produced from joy checked by distrust,
cried, “I dare say it is honestly come by.” To remove his scruples, I
made him acquainted with the whole story of my success, which, when he
heard, he danced about the room in an ecstacy, crying, “God be
praised!—a white stone!—God be praised!—a white stone!” So that I was
afraid the change of fortune had disordered his intellects, and that he
was run mad with joy. Extremely concerned at this event, I attempted to
reason him out of his frenzy, but to no purpose; for without regarding
what I said, he continued to frisk up and down, and repeat his
rhapsody, of “God be praised!—a white stone!” At last, I rose in the
utmost consternation, and, laying violent hands upon him, put a stop to
his extravagance by fixing him down to a settee that was in the room.
This constraint banished his delirium; he started as if just awoke, and
terrified at my behaviour, cried, “What is the matter!” When he learned
the cause of my apprehension, he was ashamed of his transports, and
told me, that in mentioning the white stone, he alluded to the Dies
fasti of the Romans, albo lapide notati.

Having no inclination to sleep, I secured my cash, dressed, and was
just going abroad, when the servant of the house told me, there was a
gentlewoman at the door who wanted to speak with me. Surprised at this
information, I made Strap show her up, and in less than a minute, saw a
young woman of a shabby decayed appearance enter my room. After
half-a-dozen curtsies, she began to sob, and told me her name was
Gawky; upon which information I immediately recollected the features of
Miss Lavement, who had been the first occasion of my misfortunes.
Though I had all the reason in the world to resent her treacherous
behaviour to me, I was moved at her distress, and professing my sorrow
at seeing her so reduced desired her to sit, and inquired into the
particulars of her situation. She fell upon her knees and implored my
forgiveness for the injuries she had done me, protesting before God,
that she was forced, against her inclination, into that hellish
conspiracy which had almost deprived me of my life, by the entreaties
of her husband, who, having been afterwards renounced by his father on
account of his marriage with her, and unable to support a family on his
pay, left his wife at her father’s house, and went with the regiment to
Germany, where he was broke for misbehaviour at the battle of
Dettingen; since which time she had heard no tidings of him. She then
gave me to understand, with many symptoms of penitence, that it was her
misfortune to bear a child four months after marriage, by which event
her parents were so incensed, that she was turned out of doors with the
infant, that died soon after: and had hitherto subsisted in a miserable
indigent manner, on the extorted charity of a few friends, who were now
quite tired of giving; that, not knowing where or how to support
herself one day longer, she had fled for succour even to me, who, of
all mankind, had the least cause to assist her, relying upon the
generosity of my disposition, which, she hoped, would be pleased with
this opportunity of avenging itself in the noblest manner on the wretch
who had wronged me. I was very much affected with her discourse and,
having no cause to suspect the sincerity of her repentance, raised her
up, freely pardoned all she had done against me, and promised to
befriend her as much as lay in my power.

Since my last arrival in London, I had made no advances to the
apothecary, imagining it would be impossible for me to make my
innocence appear, so unhappily was my accusation circumstanced: Strap
indeed had laboured to justify me to the schoolmaster; but, far from
succeeding in his attempt, Mr. Concordance dropped all correspondence
with him, because he refused to quit his connection with me. Things
being in this situation, I thought a fairer opportunity of vindicating
my character could not offer than that which now presented itself; I
therefore stipulated with Mrs. Gawky, that before I would yield her the
least assistance, she should do me the justice to clear my reputation
by explaining upon oath before a magistrate the whole of the
conspiracy, as it had been executed against me. When she had given me
this satisfaction, I presented her with five guineas, a sum so much
above her expectation, that she could scarce believe the evidence of
her senses, and was ready to worship me for my benevolence. The
declaration, signed with her own hand, I sent to her father, who, upon
recollecting and comparing the circumstances of my charge, was
convinced of my integrity, and waited on me next day, in company with
his friend the schoolmaster, to whom he had communicated my
vindication. After mutual salutation, Monsieur Lavement began a long
apology for the unjust treatment I had received; but I saved him a good
deal of breath by interrupting his harangue, and assuring him that, far
from entertaining a resentment against him, I thought myself obliged to
his lenity, which allowed me to escape, after such strong assumptions
of guilt appeared against me. Mr. Concordance, thinking it now his turn
to speak, observed that Mr. Random had too much candour and sagacity to
be disobliged at their conduct, which, all things considered, could not
have been otherwise with any honesty of intention. “Indeed,” said he,
“if the plot had been unravelled to us by any supernatural
intelligence; if it had been whispered by a genius, communicated by
dream, or revealed by an angel from on high, we should have been to
blame in crediting ocular demonstration; but as we were left in the
midst of mortality, it cannot be expected we should be incapable of
imposition. I must assure you, Mr. Random, no man on earth is more
pleased than I am at this triumph of your character: and, as the news
of your misfortune panged me to the very entrails, this manifestation
of your innocence makes my midriff quiver with joy.” I thanked him for
this concern, desired them to undeceive those of their acquaintance who
judged harshly of me, and, having treated them with a glass of wine,
represented to Lavement the deplorable condition of his daughter, and
pleaded her cause so effectually, that he consented to settle a small
annuity on her for life: but could not be persuaded to take her home,
because her mother was so much incensed, that she would never see her.




CHAPTER LIII


I purchase new Clothes—reprimand Strutwell and Straddle—Banter proposes
another matrimonial Scheme—I accept of his Terms—set out to Bath in the
Stage-coach with the young Lady and her Mother—the Behaviour of an
Officer and Lawyer—our fellow Travellers described—a smart dialogue
between my Mistress and the Captain


Having finished this affair to my satisfaction, I found myself
perfectly at ease; and, looking upon the gaming-table as a certain
resource for a gentleman in want, became more gay than ever. Although
my clothes were almost as good as new, I grew ashamed of wearing them,
because I thought everybody by this time had got an inventory of my
wardrobe. For which reason I disposed of a good part of my apparel to a
salesman in Monmouth Street for half the value, and bought two new
suits with the money. I likewise purchased a plain gold watch,
despairing of recovering that which I had so foolishly given to
Strutwell, whom, notwithstanding, I still continued to visit at his
levee, until the ambassador he had mentioned set out with a secretary
of his own choosing. I thought myself then at liberty to expostulate
with his lordship, whom I treated with great freedom in a letter, for
amusing me with vain hopes, when he neither had the power nor
inclination to provide for me. Nor was I less reserved with Straddle,
whom I in person reproached for misrepresenting to me the character of
Strutwell, which I did not scruple to aver was infamous in every
respect. He seemed very much enraged at my freedom, talked a great deal
about his quality and honour, and began to make some comparisons which
I thought so injurious to mine, that I demanded an explanation with
great warmth, and he was mean enough to equivocate, and condescend in
such a manner that I left him with a hearty contempt of his behaviour.

About this time, Banter, who had observed a surprising and sudden
alteration in my appearance and disposition, began to inquire very
minutely into the cause, and, as I did not think fit to let him know
the true state of the affair, lest he might make free with my purse, on
the strength of having proposed the scheme that filled it, I told him
that I had received a small supply from a relation in the country, who
at the same time had proffered to use all his interest (which was not
small) in soliciting some post for me that should make me easy for
life. “If that be the case,” said Banter, “perhaps you won’t care to
mortify yourself a little in making your fortune another way. I have a
relation who is to set out for Bath next week, with an only daughter,
who being sickly and decrepit, intends to drink the waters for the
recovery of her health. Her father, who was a rich Turkey merchant,
died about a year ago, and left her with a fortune of twenty thousand
pounds, under the sole management of her mother, who is my kinswoman. I
would have put in for the plate myself, but there is a breach at
present between the old woman and me. You must know, that some time ago
I borrowed a small sum of her and promised, it seems, to pay it before
a certain time; but being disappointed in my expectation of money from
the country, the day elapsed without my being able to take up my note;
upon which she wrote a peremptory letter, threatening to arrest me, if
I did not pay the debt immediately. Nettled at this precise behaviour,
I sent a d—d severe answer, which enraged her so much that she actually
took out a writ against me. Whereupon, finding the thing grow serious,
I got a friend to advance the money for me, discharged the debt, went
to her house, and abused her for her unfriendly dealing. She was
provoked by my reproaches, and scolded in her turn. The little deformed
urchin joined her mother with such virulence and volubility of tongue,
that I was fain to make a retreat, after having been honoured with a
great many scandalous epithets, which gave me plainly to understand
that I had nothing to hope from the esteem of the one, or the affection
of the other. As they are both utter strangers to life, it is a
thousand to one that the girl will be picked up by some scoundrel or
other at Bath, if I don’t provide for her otherwise. You are a
well-looking fellow, Random, and can behave as demurely as a quaker. If
you will give me an obligation of five hundred pounds, to be paid six
months after your marriage, I will put you in a method of carrying her
in spite of all opposition.”

This proposal was too advantageous for me to be refused. The writing
was immediately drawn up and executed; and Banter, giving me notice of
the time when, and the stage coach in which they were to set out, I
bespoke a place in the same convenience; and, having hired a horse for
Strap, who was chagrined with the prospect, set forward accordingly.

As we embarked before day, I had not the pleasure for some time of
seeing Miss Snapper (that was the name of my mistress), nor even of
perceiving the number and sex of my fellow travellers, although I
guessed that the coach was full, by the difficulty I found in seating
myself. The first five minutes passed in a general silence, when, all
of a sudden, the coach heeling to one side, a boisterous voice
pronounced, “To the right and left, cover your flanks, d—me! whiz!” I
easily discovered by the tone and matter of this exclamation that it
was uttered by a son of Mars; neither was it hard to conceive the
profession of another person who sat opposite to me, and observed that
we ought to have been well satisfied of our security before we entered
upon the premises. These two sallies had not the desired effect. We
continued a good while as mute as before, till at length the gentleman
of the sword, impatient of longer silence, made a second effort, by
swearing he had got into a meeting of quakers. “I believe so too,” said
a shrill female voice at my left hand, “for the spirit of folly begins
to move.” “Out with it then, madam!” replied the soldier. “You seem to
have no occasion for a midwife,” cried the lady. “D—mn my blood!”
exclaimed the other, “a man can’t talk to a woman, but she immediately
thinks of a midwife.” “True sir,” said she, “I long to be delivered.”
“What of—a mouse, madam?” said he. “No, Sir,” said she, “of a fool.”
“Are you far gone with a fool?” said he. “Little more than two miles,”
said she. “By Gad, you’re a wit, madam,” cried the officer, “I wish I
could with any justice return the compliment,” said the lady. “Zounds,
I have done,” said he. “Your bolt is soon shot, according to the old
proverb,” said she. The warrior’s powder was quite spent; the lawyer
advised him to drop the prosecution, and a grave matron, who sat on the
left hand of the victorious wit, told her she must not let her tongue
run so fast among strangers. This reprimand, softened with the
appellation of child, convinced me that the satirical lady was no other
than Miss Snapper, and I resolved to regulate my conduct accordingly.
The champion, finding himself so smartly handled, changed his battery,
and began to expatiate on his own exploits. “You talk of shot, madam,”
said he; “d—me! I have both given and received some shot in my time—I
was wounded in the shoulder by a pistol ball at Dettingen, where—I say
nothing—but by G—d! if it had not been for me—all’s one for that—I
despise boasting, d—me! whiz!” So saying, he whistled one part and
hummed another, of the Black Joke; then, addressing himself to the
lawyer, went on thus; “Wouldn’t you think it d—d hard, after having, at
the risk of your life, recovered the standard of a regiment that had
been lost, to receive no preferment for your pains? I don’t choose to
name no names, sink me! but, howsomever, this I will refer, by G—d! and
that is this—a musketeer of the French guards, having a standard from a
certain cornet of a certain regiment, d—e! was retreating with his
prize as fast as his horse’s heels could carry him, sink me! Upon
which, I snatched up firelock that belonged to a dead man, d—me! Whiz!
and shot his horse under him, d—n my blood! The fellow got upon his
feet, and began to repose me, upon which I charged my bayonet breast
high, and ran him through the body by G—! One of his comrades, coming
to his assistance, shot me in the shoulder, as I told you before; and
another gave me a contusion on the head with the butt-end of his
carbine; but, d—me, that did not signify. I killed one, put the other
to flight, and taking up the standard, carried it off very
deliberately. But the best joke of all was the son of a b—ch of a
cornet, who had surrendered it in a cowardly manner, seeing it in my
possession, demanded it from me in the front of the line. “D—n my
blood!” says he, “where did you find my standard?” says he. “D—n my
blood!” said I, “where,” said I, “did you lose it?” said I. “That’s
nothing to you,” says he, “’tis my standard,” says he” and by G—d I’ll
have it,” says he. “D—nation seize me,” says I, “if you shall,” says I,
“till I have first delivered it to the general,” says I; and
accordingly I went to the headquarters after the battle, and delivered
it to my Lord Stair, who promised to do for me. But I am no more than a
poor lieutenant still, d—n my blood.”

Having vented this repetition of expletives, the lawyer owned he had
not been requited according to his deserts; observed that the labourer
is always worthy of his hire, and asked if the promise was made before
witnesses, because in that case the law would compel the general to
perform it; but understanding that the promise was made over a bottle,
without being restricted to time or terms, he pronounced it not valid
in law, proceeded to inquire into the particulars of the battle, and
affirmed that, although the English had drawn themselves into premunire
at first, the French managed their cause so lamely in the course of the
dispute, that they would have been utterly nonsuited, had they not
obtained a nolli prosequi. In spite of these enlivening touches, the
conversation was like to suffer another long interruption, when the
lieutenant, unwilling to conceal any of his accomplishments that could
be displayed in his present situation, offered to regale the company
with a song; and, interpreting our silence into a desire of hearing,
began to warble a fashionable air the first stanza of which he
pronounced thus:

“Would you task the moon-tide hair,
To yon flagrant beau repair.
Where waving with the poplin vow,
The bantling fine will shelter you,” etc.


The sense of the rest he perverted as he went on with such surprising
facility that I could not help thinking he had been at some pains to
burlesque the performance. Miss Snapper ascribed it to the true cause,
namely ignorance; and, when he asked her how she relished his music,
answered that, in her opinion, the music and the words were much of a
piece. “Oh, d—n my blood!” said he “I take that as a high compliment;
for everybody allows the words are d—able fine.” “They may be so,”
replied the lady, “for aught I know, but they are above my
comprehension.” “I an’t obliged to find you comprehension, madam, curse
me!” cried he. “No, nor to speak sense neither,” said she. “D—n my
heart,” said he, “I’ll speak what I please.” Here the lawyer
interposed, by telling him, there were some things he must not speak;
and upon being defied to give an instance, mentioned treason and
defamation. “As for the king,” cried the soldier, “God bless him—I eat
his bread, and have lost blood in his cause, therefore I have nothing
to say to him—but, by G—d, I dare say anything to any other man.” “No,”
said the lawyer, “you dare not call me rogue.” “D—me, for what?” said
the other. “Because,” replied the counsellor, “I should have it good
action against you, and recover.” “Well, well,” cried the officer, “if
I dare not call you rogue, I dare think you one, d—me!” This stroke of
wit he accompanied with a loud laugh of self-approbation, which
unluckily did not affect the audience, but effectually silenced his
antagonist, who did not open his mouth for the space of an hour, except
to clear his pipe with three hems, which however, produced nothing.




CHAPTER LIV


Day breaking, I have the Pleasure of viewing the Person of Miss
Snapper, whom I had not seen before—the Soldier is witty upon me—is
offended—talks much of his Valour—is reprimanded by a grave
Gentlewoman—we are alarmed by the cry of Highwaymen—I get out of the
Coach, and stand in my own defence—they ride off without having
attacked us—I pursue them—one of them is thrown from his Horse and
taken—I return to the Coach—am complimented by Miss Snapper—the
Captain’s Behaviour on this Occasion—the Prude reproaches me in a
Soliloquy—I upbraid her in the same Manner—the Behaviour of Miss
Snapper, at Breakfast, disobliges me—the Lawyer is witty upon the
Officer, who threatens him


In the meantime, the day breaking in upon us, discovered to one another
the faces of their fellow travellers: and I had the good fortune to
find my mistress not quite so deformed nor disagreeable as she had been
represented to me. Her head, indeed, bore some resemblance to a
hatchet, the edge being represented by her face; but she had a certain
delicacy in her complexion, and a great deal of vivacity in her eyes,
which were very large and black; and, though the protuberance of her
breast, when considered alone, seemed to drag her forwards, it was easy
to perceive an equivalent on her back which balanced the other, and
kept her body in equilibrio. On the whole, I thought I should have
great reason to congratulate myself if it should be my fate to possess
twenty thousand pounds encumbered with such a wife. I began therefore
to deliberate about the most probable means of acquiring the conquest,
and was so much engrossed by this idea, that I scarce took any notice
of the rest of the people in the coach, but revolved my project in
silence; while the conversation was maintained as before by the object
of my hopes, the son of Mars, and the barrister, who by this time
recollected himself, and talked in terms as much as ever. At length a
dispute happened, which ended in a wager, to be determined by me, who
was so much absorbed in contemplation, that I neither heard the
reference nor the question which was put to me by each in his turn.
Affronted at my supposed contempt, the soldier with great vociferation
swore I was either dumb or deaf if not both, and that I looked as if I
could not say Bo to a goose. Aroused at this observation, I fixed my
eyes upon him, and pronounced with emphasis the interjection Bo! Upon
which he cocked his hat in a fierce manner, and cried, “D—me sir, what
d’ye mean by that.” Had I intended to answer him, which by the by was
not my design, I should have been anticipated by Miss, who told him, my
meaning was to show, that I could cry Bo to a goose; and laughed very
heartily at my laconic reproof. Her explanation and mirth did not help
to appease his wrath, which broke out in several martial insinuations,
such as—“I do not understand such freedoms, d—me! D—n my blood! I’m a
gentleman, and bear the king’s commission. ’Sblood! some people deserve
to have their noses pulled for their impertinence.” I thought to have
checked these ejaculations by a frown; because he had talked so much of
his valour that I had long ago rated him as an ass in a lion’s skin;
but this expedient did not answer my expectation, he took umbrage at
the contraction of my brow, swore he did not value my sulky looks a
fig’s end, and protested he feared no man breathing. Miss Snapper said,
she was very glad to find herself in company with a man of so much
courage, who, she did not doubt, would protect her from all the
attempts of highwaymen during our journey. “Make yourself perfectly
easy on that head, madam,” replied the officer. “I have got a pair of
pistols (here they are), which I took from a horse officer at the
battle of Dettingen; they are double loaded, and if any highwayman in
England robs you of the value of a pin while I have the honour of being
in your company, d—n my heart.” When he had expressed himself in this
manner, a prim gentlewoman, who had sat silent hitherto, opened her
mouth, and said, she wondered how any man could be so rude as to pull
out such weapons before ladies. “D—me, madam,” cried the champion, “if
you are so much afraid at the sight of a pistol, how d’ye propose to
stand fire if there should be occasion?” She then told him that, if she
thought he could be so unmannerly as to use fire-arms in her presence,
whatever might be the occasion, she would get out of the coach
immediately, and walk to the next village, where she might procure a
convenience to herself. Before he could make any answer, my Dulcinea
interposed, and observed that, far from being offended at a gentleman’s
using his arms in his own defence, she thought herself very lucky in
being along with one by whose valour she stood a good chance of saving
herself from being rifled. The prude cast a disdainful look at Miss,
and said that people, who have but little to lose, are sometimes the
most solicitous about preserving it. The old lady was affronted at this
inuendo, and took notice, that people ought to be very well informed
before they speak slightingly of other people’s fortune, lest they
discover their own envy, and make themselves ridiculous. The daughter
declared, that she did not pretend to vie with anybody in point of
riches; and if the lady, who insisted upon non-resistance, would
promise to indemnify us all for the loss we should sustain, she would
be one of the first to persuade the captain to submission, in case we
should be attacked. To this proposal, reasonable as it was, the
reserved lady made no other reply than a scornful glance and a toss of
her head. I was very well pleased with the spirit of my young mistress,
and even wished for an opportunity of distinguishing my courage under
her eye, which I believed could not fail of prepossessing her in my
favour, when all of a sudden Strap rode up to the coach door, and told
us in a great fright, that two men on horseback were crossing the heath
(for by this time we had passed Hounslow), and made directly towards
us.

This piece of information was no sooner delivered, than Mrs. Snapper
began to scream, her daughter grew pale, the old lady pulled out her
purse to be in readiness, the lawyer’s teeth chattered, while he
pronounced, “’Tis no matter—we’ll sue the county and recover.” The
captain gave evident signs of confusion: and I, after having commanded
the coachman to stop, opened the door, jumped out, and invited the
warrior to follow me. But, finding him backward and astonished, I took
his pistols, and, giving them to Strap, who had by this time alighted
and trembled very much, I mounted on horseback; and, taking my own
(which I could better depend upon) from the holsters, cocked them both,
and faced the robbers, who were now very near us. Seeing me ready to
oppose them on horseback, and another man armed a-foot, they made a
halt at some distance to reconnoitre us: and after having rode round us
twice, myself still facing about as they rode, went off the same way
they came, at a hand gallop. A gentleman’s servant coming up with a
horse at the same time, I offered him a crown to assist me in pursuing
them, which he no sooner accepted, than I armed him with the officer’s
pistols, and we galloped after the thieves, who, trusting to the
swiftness of their horses, stopped till we came within shot of them and
then, firing at us, put their nags to the full speed. We followed them
as fast as our beasts could carry us; but, not being so well mounted as
they, our efforts would have been to little purpose, had not the horse
of one of them stumbled, and thrown his rider with such violence over
his head, that he lay senseless when we came up, and was taken without
the least opposition; while his comrade consulted his own safety in
flight, without regarding the distress of his friend. We scarce had
time to make ourselves masters of his arms, and tie his hands together,
before he recovered his senses, when, learning his situation he
affected surprise, demanded to know by what authority we used a
gentleman in that manner, and had the impudence to threaten us with a
prosecution for robbery. In the meantime, we perceived Strap coming up
with a crowd of people, armed up with different kinds of weapons; and
among the rest a farmer, who no sooner perceived the thief, whom we had
secured, than he cried with great emotion, “There’s the fellow who
robbed me an hour ago of twenty pounds, in a canvas bag.” He was
immediately searched, and the money found exactly as it had been
described; upon which we committed him to the charge of the countryman,
who carried him to the town of Hounslow, which, it seems, the farmer
had alarmed; and I, having satisfied the footman for his trouble,
according to promise, returned with Strap to the coach, where I found
the captain and lawyer busy in administering smelling bottles and
cordials to the grave lady, who had gone into a fit at the noise of
firing.

When I had taken my seat, Miss Snapper, who from the coach had seen
everything that happened; made me a compliment on my behaviour, and
said she was glad to see me returned without having received any
injury; her mother too owned herself obliged to my resolution: the
lawyer told me, that I was entitled by act of parliament to a reward of
forty pounds, for having apprehended a highwayman. The soldier
observed, with a countenance in which impudence and shame struggling,
produced some disorder, that if I had not been in such a d—d hurry to
get out of the coach, he would have secured the rogues effectually,
without all this bustle and loss of time, by a scheme, which my heat
and precipitation ruined. “For my own part,” continued he, “I am always
extremely cool on these occasions.” “So it appeared, by your
trembling,” said the young lady. “Death and d—ion!” cried he, “your sex
protects you, madam; if any man on earth durst tell me so much, I’d
send him to hell, d—n my heart! in an instant.” So saying, he fixed his
eyes upon me, and asked if I had seen him tremble? I answered without
hesitation, “Yes.” “D—me, sir!” said he, “d’ye doubt my courage?” I
replied, “Very much.” This declaration quite disconcerted him. He
looked blank, and pronounced with a faltering voice, “Oh! it’s very
well: d—n my blood! I shall find a time.” I signified my contempt of
him, by thrusting my tongue in my cheek, which humbled him so much,
that he scarce swore another oath aloud during the whole journey.

The precise lady, having recruited her spirits by the help of some
strong waters, began a soliloquy, in which she wondered that any man,
who pretended to maintain the character of a gentleman, could, for the
sake of a little paltry coin, throw persons of honour into such
quandaries as might endanger their lives; and professed her surprise
that women were not ashamed to commend such brutality. At the same time
vowing that for the future she would never set foot in a stage coach,
if a private convenience could be had for love or money.

Nettled at her remarks, I took the same method of conveying my
sentiments, and wondered in my turn, that any woman of common sense
should be so unreasonable as to expect that people, who had neither
acquaintance nor connection with her, would tamely allow themselves to
be robbed and maltreated, merely to indulge her capricious humour. I
likewise confessed my astonishment at her insolence and ingratitude in
taxing a person with brutality, who deserved her approbation and
acknowledgment; and vowed that, if ever she should be assaulted again,
I would leave her to the mercy of the spoiler, that she might know the
value of my protection.

This person of honour did not think fit to carry on the altercation any
further, but seemed to chew the cud of her resentment with the
crestfallen captain, while I entered into discourse with my charmer,
who was the more pleased with my conversation, as she had conceived a
very indifferent opinion of my intellects from my former silence. I
should have had cause to be equally satisfied with the sprightliness of
her genius, could she have curbed her imagination with judgment; but
she laboured under such a profusion of talk, that I dreaded her unruly
tongue, and felt by anticipation the horrors of an eternal clack!
However, when I considered, on the other hand, the joys attending the
possession of twenty thousand pounds, I forgot her imperfections,
seized occasion by the forelock, and tried to insinuate myself into her
affection. The careful mother kept a strict watch over her and though
she could not help behaving civilly to me, took frequent opportunities
of discouraging our communication, by reprimanding her for being so
free with strangers, and telling her she must learn to speak less and
think more. Abridged of the use of speech, we conversed with our eyes,
and I found the young lady very eloquent in this kind of discourse. In
short, I had reason to believe that she was sick of the old
gentlewoman’s tuition, and that I should find it no difficult matter to
supersede her authority.

When we arrived at the place where we were to breakfast, I alighted,
and helped my mistress out of the coach, as well as her mother who
called for a private room to which they withdrew in order to eat by
themselves. As they retired together, I perceived that Miss had got
more twists from nature than I had before observed for she was bent
sideways into the figure of an S, so that her progression very much
resembled that of a crab. The prude also chose the captain for her
messmate, and ordered breakfast for two only, to be brought into
another separate room: while the lawyer and I, deserted by the rest of
the company, were fain to put up with each other. I was a good deal
chagrined at the stately reserve of Mrs. Snapper, who, I thought, did
not use me with all the complaisance I deserved; and my companion
declared that he had been a traveller for twenty years, and never knew
the stage coach rules so much infringed before. As for the honourable
gentlewoman I could not conceive the meaning of her attachment to the
lieutenant; and asked the lawyer if he knew for which of the soldier’s
virtues she admired him? The counsellor facetiously replied, “I suppose
the lady knows him to be an able conveyancer, and wants him to make a
settlement in tail.” I could not help laughing at the archness of the
barrister, who entertained me during breakfast with a great deal of wit
of the same kind, at the expense of our fellow travellers; and among
other things said, he was sorry to find the young lady saddled with
such incumbrances.

When we had made an end of our repast, and paid our reckoning, we went
into the coach, took our places, and bribed the driver with sixpence to
revenge us on the rest of his fare, by hurrying them away in the midst
of their meal. This task he performed to our satisfaction, after he had
disturbed their enjoyment with his importunate clamour. The mother and
daughter obeyed the summons first, and, coming to the coach door, were
obliged to desire the coachman’s assistance to get in, because the
lawyer and I had agreed to show our resentment by our neglect. They
were no sooner seated, than the captain appeared, as much heated as if
he had been pursued a dozen miles by an enemy; and immediately after
him came the lady, not without some marks of disorder. Having helped
her up, he entered himself, growling a few oaths against the coachman
for his impertinent interruption; and the lawyer comforted him by
saying, that if he had suffered a nisi prius through the obstinacy of
the defendant, he might have an opportunity to join issue at the next
stage. This last expression gave offence to the grave gentlewoman, who
told him, if she was a man, she would make him repent of such
obscenity, and thanked God she had never been in such company before.
At this insinuation the captain thought himself under a necessity of
espousing the lady’s cause; and accordingly threatened to cut off the
lawyer’s ears, if he should give his tongue any such liberties for the
future. The poor counsellor begged pardon, and universal silence
ensued.




CHAPTER LV


I resolve to ingratiate myself with the Mother, and am favoured by
accident—the Precise Lady finds her husband, and quit the Coach—the
Captain is disappointed of his dinner—we arrive at Bath—I accompany
Miss Snapper to the Long-room, where she is attacked by beau Nash, and,
turns the Laugh against him—I make love to her, and receive a
check—Squire her to an Assembly, where I am blessed with a Sight of my
dear Narcissa, which discomposes me so much, that Miss Snapper,
observing my disorder, is at pains to discover the Cause—is piqued at
the Occasion, and, in our way home, pays me a sarcastic Compliment—I am
met by Miss Williams, who is the maid and Confidante of Narcissa—she
acquaints me with her Lady’s regard for me while under the disguise of
a Servant, and describes the Transports of Narcissa on seeing me at the
Assembly, in the Character of a Gentleman—I am surprised with an
Account of her Aunt’s Marriage, and make an Appointment to meet Miss
Williams the next day


During this unsocial interval, my pride and interest maintained a
severe conflict on the subject of Miss Snapper, whom the one
represented as unworthy of notice, and the other proposed as the object
of my whole attention: the advantages and disadvantages of such a match
were opposed to one another by my imagination; and, at length, my
judgment gave it so much in favour of the first, that I resolved to
prosecute my scheme with all the address in my power. I thought I
perceived some concern in her countenance, occasioned by my silence,
which she, no doubt, imputed to my disgust at her mother’s behaviour;
and, as I believed the old woman could not fail of ascribing my
muteness to the same motive, I determined to continue that sullen
conduct towards her, and fall upon some other method of manifesting my
esteem for the daughter, nor was it difficult for me to make her
acquainted with my sentiments by the expression of my looks, which I
modelled into the character of humanity and love; and which were
answered by her with all the sympathy and approbation I could desire.
But when I began to consider, that, without further opportunities of
improving my success, all the progress I had hitherto made would not
much avail, and that such opportunities could not be enjoyed without
the mother’s permission, I concluded it would be requisite to vanquish
her coldness and suspicion by my assiduities and respectful behaviour
on the road; and she would, in all likelihood, invite me to visit her
at Bath, where I did not fear of being able to cultivate her
acquaintance as much as would be necessary to the accomplishment of my
purpose. And indeed accident furnished me with an opportunity of
obliging her so much that she could not, with any appearance of good
manners, forbear to gratify my inclination.

When we arrived at our dining-place, we found all the eatables at the
inn bespoke by a certain nobleman, who had got the start of us and, in
all likelihood, my mistress and her mother must have dined with Duke
Humphrey, had I not exerted myself in their behalf, and bribed the
landlord with a glass of wine to curtail his lordship’s entertainment
of a couple of fowls and some bacon, which I sent with my compliments
to the ladies. They accepted my treat with a great many thanks, and
desired I would favour them with my company at dinner, where I amused
the old gentlewoman so successfully, by maintaining a seemingly
disinterested ease in the midst of my civility, that she signified a
desire of being better acquainted, and hoped I would be so kind as to
see her sometimes at Bath. While I enjoyed myself in this manner, the
precise lady had the good fortune to meet with her husband, who was no
other than gentleman, or, in other words, valet-de-chambre, to the very
nobleman whose coach stood at the door. Proud of the interest she had
in the house, she affected to show her power by introducing the captain
to her spouse as a person who had treated her with great civility upon
which he was invited to a share of their dinner; while the poor lawyer,
finding himself utterly abandoned, made application to me, and was
through my intercession admitted into our company. Having satisfied our
appetites, and made ourselves merry at the expense of the person of
honour, the civil captain, and complaisant husband, I did myself the
pleasure of discharging the bill by stealth, for which I received a
great many apologies and acknowledgments from my guests, and we
re-embarked at the first warning. The officer was obliged, at last, to
appease his hunger with a luncheon of bread and cheese, and a pint
bottle of brandy, which he dispatched in the coach, cursing the
inappetence of his lordship, who had ordered dinner to be put back a
whole hour.

Nothing remarkable happened during the remaining part of our journey,
which was finished next day, when I waited on the ladies to the house
of a relation, in which they intended to lodge, and, passing that night
at the inn, took lodgings in the morning for myself.

The forenoon was spent in visiting everything that was worth seeing in
the place, in company with a gentleman to whom Banter had given me a
letter of introduction; and in the afternoon I waited on the ladies,
and found Miss a good deal indisposed with the fatigue of their
journey. As they foresaw they should have occasion for a male
acquaintance to squire them at all public places, I was received with
great cordiality, and had the mother’s permission to conduct them next
day to the Long Room, which we no sooner entered, than the eyes of
everybody present were turned upon us, and, when we had suffered the
martyrdom of their looks for some time, a whisper circulated at our
expense, which was accompanied with many contemptuous smiles and
tittering observations, to my utter shame and confusion. I did not so
much conduct as follow my charge to a place where she seated her mother
and herself with astonishing composure notwithstanding the unmannerly
behaviour of the whole company, which seemed to be assumed merely to
put her out of countenance. The celebrated Mr. Nash, who commonly
attends in this place, as master of the ceremonies, perceiving the
disposition of the assembly, took upon himself the task of gratifying
their ill-nature further, by exposing my mistress to the edge of his
wit. With this view he approached us, with many bows and grimaces, and,
after having welcomed Miss Snapper to the place, asked her in the
hearing of all present, if she could inform him of the name of Tobit’s
dog. Miss was so much incensed at his insolence, that I should
certainly have kicked him where he stood without ceremony, had not the
young lady prevented the effects of my indignation, by replying with
the utmost vivacity, “His name was Nash, and an impudent dog he was.”
This repartee so unexpected and just, raised such a universal laugh at
the aggressor, that all his assurance was insufficient to support him
under their derision; so that, after he had endeavoured to compose
himself by taking snuff and forcing a smile, he was obliged to sneak
off in a ludicrous attitude, while my Dulcinea was applauded to the
skies for the brilliancy of her wit, and her acquaintance immediately
courted by the best people of both sexes in the room.

This event, with which I was indefinitely pleased at first, did not
fail of alarming me, upon further reflection, when I considered, that
the more she was caressed by persons of distinction, the more her pride
would be inflamed, and consequently, the obstacles to my success
multiplied and enlarged. Nor were my presaging fears untrue. That very
night I perceived her a little intoxicated with the incense she had
received, and, though, she still behaved with a particular civility to
me, I foresaw, that, as soon as her fortune should be known, she would
be surrounded with a swarm of admirers, some of whom might possibly, by
excelling me on point of wealth, or in the arts of flattery and
scandal, supplant me in her esteem, and find means to make the mother
of his party. I resolved therefore to lose no time, and, being invited
to spend the evening with them, found an opportunity, in spite of the
old gentlewoman’s vigilance, to explain the meaning of my glances in
the coach, by paying homage to her wit, and professing myself enamoured
of her person. She blushed at my declaration and in a favourable manner
disapproved of the liberty I had taken, putting me in mind of our being
strangers to each other, and desiring I would not be the means of
interrupting our acquaintance, by any such unseasonable strokes of
gallantry for the future. My ardour was effectually checked by this
reprimand, which was, however, delivered in a gentle manner, that I had
no cause to be disobliged; and the arrival of her mother relieved me
from a dilemma in which I should not have known how to demean myself a
minute longer. Neither could I resume the easiness of carriage with
which I came in; my mistress acted on the reserve, and the conversation
beginning to flag, the old lady introduced her kinswoman of the house,
and proposed a hand at whist.

While we amused ourselves at this diversion, I understood from the
gentlewoman, that there was to be an assembly next night at which I
begged to have the honour of dancing with Miss. She thanked me for the
favour I intended her, assured me she never did dance, but signified a
desire of seeing the company, when I offered my service, which was
accepted, not a little proud of being exempted from appearing with her
in a situation, that, notwithstanding my profession to the contrary,
was not at all agreeable to my inclination.

Having supped, and continued the game, till such time as the successive
yawns of the mother warned me to be gone, I took my leave, and went
home, where I made Strap very happy with an account of my progress.
Next day I put on my gayest apparel, and went to drink tea at Mrs.
Snapper’s, according to appointment, when I found, to my inexpressible
satisfaction, that she was laid up with the toothache, and that Miss
was to be intrusted to my care. Accordingly, we set out for the
ball-room pretty early in the evening, and took possession of a
commodious place, where we had not sat longer than a quarter of an
hour, when a gentleman, dressed in a green frock, came in, leading a
young lady, whom I immediately discovered to be the adorable Narcissa!
Good heaven! what were the thrillings of my soul at that instant! my
reflection was overwhelmed with a torrent of agitation! my heart
throbbed with surprising violence! a sudden mist overspread my eyes, my
ears were invaded with a dreadful sound! I panted for want of breath,
and, in short, was for some moments entranced! This first tumult
subsiding, a crowd of flattering ideas rushed upon my imagination.
Everything, that was soft, sensible, and engaging, in the character of
that dear creature recurred to my remembrance, and every favourable
circumstance of my own qualifications appeared in all the aggravation
of self-conceit, to heighten my expectation! Neither was this transport
of long duration. The dread of her being already disposed of
intervened, and overcast my enchanting reverie! My presaging
apprehension represented her encircled in the arms of some happy rival,
and in consequence for ever lost to me. I was stung with this
suggestion, and, believing the person who conducted her to be the
husband of this amiable young lady, already devoted him to my fury, and
stood up to mark him for my vengeance, when I recollected, to my
unspeakable joy, her brother the fox-hunter, in the person of her
gallant.

Undeceived so much to my satisfaction in this particular, I gazed in a
frenzy of delight on the irresistible charms of his sister, who no
sooner distinguished me in the crowd, than her evident confusion
afforded a happy omen to my flame. At sight of me she started, the
roses instantly vanished from her polished cheeks, and returned in a
moment with a double glow, that overspread her lovely neck, while her
enchanting bosom heaved with strong emotion. I hailed these favourable
symptoms, and, lying in wait for her looks, did homage with my eyes.
She seemed to approve my declaration, by the complacency of her aspect;
and I was so transported with the discovery, that more than once I was
on the point of making up to her, to disclose the throbbings of my
heart in person, had not that profound veneration, which her presence
always inspired, restrained the unseasonable impulse. All my powers
being engrossed in this manner, it may easily be imagined how ill I
entertained Miss Snapper on whom I could not now turn my eyes, without
making comparisons very little to her advantage. It was not even in my
power to return distinct answers to the questions she asked from time
to time, so that she could not help observing my absence of mind; and
having a turn for observation, watched my glances, and, tracing them to
the divine object, discovered the cause of my disorder. That she might,
however, be convinced of the truth of her conjecture, she began to
interrogate me with regard to Narcissa, and, notwithstanding all my
endeavours to disguise my sentiments, perceived my attachment by my
confusion: upon which, she assumed a stateliness of behaviour, and sat
silent during the remaining part of the entertainment. At any other
time, her suspicion would have alarmed me: but now I was elevated by my
passion above every other consideration. The mistress of my soul having
retired with her brother, I discovered so much uneasiness at my
situation, that Miss Snapper proposed to go home; and, while I
conducted her to a chair, told me she had too great a regard for me to
keep me any longer in torment. I feigned ignorance of her meaning, and
having seen her safely at her lodgings, took my leave, and went home in
an ecstasy, where I disclosed everything that had happened to my
confidant and humble servant, Strap, who did not relish the accident so
well as I expected; and observed, that a bird in the hand is worth two
in the bush. “But, however,” said he, “you know best—you know best.”
Next day, as, I went to the Pump Room, in hopes of seeing or hearing
some tidings of my fair enslaver, I was met by a gentlewoman, who,
having looked hard at me, cried, “O Christ, Mr. Random!” Surprised at
this exclamation, I examined the countenance of the person who spoke,
and immediately recognised my old sweetheart and fellow sufferer, Miss
Williams.

I was mightily pleased to find this unfortunate woman under such a
decent appearance, professed my joy at seeing her so well, and desired
to know where I should have the pleasure of her conversation. She was
as heartily rejoiced at the apparent easiness of my fortune, and gave
me to know that she, as yet, had no habitation that she could properly
call her own; but would wait on me at any place I should please to
appoint. Understanding that she was unengaged for the present, I showed
her the way to my lodgings, where, after a very affectionate
salutation, she informed me of her being very happy in the service of a
young lady to whom she was recommended by a former mistress deceased,
into whose family she had recommended herself by the honest deceit she
had concerted, while she lived with me in the garret at London. She
then expressed a vehement desire to be acquainted with the vicissitudes
of my life since we parted, and excused her curiosity on account of the
concern she had for my interest. I forthwith gratified her request,
and, when I described my situation in Sussex, perceived her to attend
to my story with particular eagerness. She interrupted me, when I had
finished that period, with, “Good God! is it possible?” and then begged
I would be so good as to continue my relation; which I did as briefly
as I could, burning with impatience to know the cause of her surprise,
about which I had already formed a very interesting conjecture.

When I had brought my adventures down to the present day, who seemed
very much affected with the different circumstances of my fortune; and
saying, with a smile, she believed my distresses were now at a period,
proceeded to inform me that the lady whom she served was no other than
the charming Narcissa, who had honoured her with her confidence for
some time; in consequence of which trust, she had often repeated the
story of John Brown with great admiration and regard; that she loved to
dwell upon the particulars of his character, and did not scruple to own
a tender approbation of his flame. I became delirious at this piece of
intelligence, strained Miss Williams in my embrace, called her the
angel of my happiness, and acted such extravagances, that she might
have been convinced of my sincerity, had she not been satisfied of my
honour before. As soon as was in condition to yield attention, she
described the present situation of her mistress, who had no sooner
reached her lodgings the night before, than she closeted her, and in a
rapture of joy gave her to know that she had seen me at the ball, where
I appeared in the character which she always thought my due, with such
advantage of transformation that, unless my image had been engraven on
her heart, it would have been impossible to know me for the person who
had worn her aunt’s livery; that by the language of my eyes, she was
assured of the continuance of my passion for her, and consequently of
my being unengaged to any other; and that, though she did not doubt I
would speedily fall upon some method of being introduced, she was so
impatient to hear of me, that she (Miss Williams) had been sent abroad
this very morning, on purpose to learn the name and character I at
present bore. My bosom had been hitherto a stranger to such a flood of
joy as now rushed upon it; my faculties were overborne by the tide; it
was some time before I could open my mouth, and much longer ere I could
utter a coherent sentence. At length, I fervently requested her to lead
me immediately to the object of my adoration; but she resisted my
importunity, and explained the danger of such premature conduct. “How
favourable soever,” said she, “my lady’s inclination towards you may
be, you may depend upon it, she will not commit the smallest trespass
on decorum, either in disclosing her own, or in receiving a declaration
of your passion: and, although the great veneration I have for you has
prompted me to reveal what she communicated to me in confidence, I know
so well the severity of her sentiments with respect to the punctilios
of her sex that, if she should learn the least surmise of it, she would
not only dismiss me as a wretch unworthy of her benevolence, but also
for ever shun the efforts of your love.” I assented to the justness of
her remonstrance, and desired she would assist me with her advice and
direction: upon which it was concerted between us, that for the present
I should be contented with her telling Narcissa that, in the course of
her inquiries, she could only learn my name: and that, if, in a day or
two, I could fall upon no other method of being introduced to her
mistress, she would deliver a letter from me, on pretence of consulting
her happiness: and say that I met her in the streets, and bribed her to
this piece of service. Matters being thus adjusted, I kept my old
acquaintance to breakfast, and learned from her conversation, that my
rival Sir Timothy had drunk himself into an apoplexy, of which he died
five months ago; that the savage was still unmarried and that his aunt
had been seized with a whim which he little expected, and chosen the
schoolmaster of the parish for her lord and husband: but matrimony not
agreeing with her constitution she had been hectic and dropsical a good
while, and was now at Bath, in order to drink the waters for the
recovery of her health; that her niece had accompanied her thither at
her request, and attended her with the same affection as before,
notwithstanding the mistake she had committed: and that the nephew, who
had been exasperated at the loss of her fortune, did not give his
attendance out of good will, but purely to have an eye on his sister,
lest she should likewise throw herself away without his consent or
approbation. Having enjoyed ourselves in this manner, and made an
assignation to meet next day at a certain place, Miss Williams took her
leave; and Strap’s looks being very inquisitive about the nature of the
communication subsisting between us, I made him acquainted with the
whole affair, to his great astonishment and satisfaction.




CHAPTER LVI


I become acquainted with Narcissa’s brother, who invites me to his
House, where I am introduced to that adorable Creature—after dinner,
the Squire retires to take his nap—Freeman, guessing the Situation of
my Thought, withdraws likewise, on pretence of Business—I declare my
passion for Narcissa—am well-received—charmed with her Conversation—the
Squire detains us to Supper—I elude his design by a Stratagem, and get
home sober


In the afternoon, I drank tea at the house of Mr. Freeman, to whom I
had been recommended by Banter; where I had not sat five minutes, till
the foxhunter came in, and by his familiar behaviour appeared to be
intimate with my friend. I was, at first, under some concern, lest he
should recollect my features; but when I found myself introduced to him
as a gentleman from London, without being discovered, I blessed the
opportunity that brought me into his company; hoping that, in the
course of my acquaintance, he would invite me to his house; nor were my
hopes frustrated, for, as we spent the evening together, he grew
extremely fond of my conversation, asked a great many childish
questions about France and foreign parts; and seemed so highly
entertained with my answers, that in his cups he shook me often by the
hand, pronounced me an honest fellow, and in fine desired our company
at dinner next day, at his civil house. My imagination was so much
employed in anticipating the happiness I was to enjoy next day, that I
slept very little that night; but, rising early in the morning, went to
the place appointed, where I met my she-friend, and imparted to her my
success with the squire. She was very much pleased at the occasion,
“which,” she said, “could not fail of being agreeable to Narcissa, who,
in spite of her passion for me, had mentioned some scruples relating to
my true situation and character, which the delicacy of her sentiments
suggested, and which she believed I would find it necessary to remove,
though she did not know how.” I was a good deal startled at this
insinuation, because I foresaw the difficulty I should find in barely
doing myself justice: for, although it never was my intention to impose
myself upon any woman, much less on Narcissa, I laid claim to the
character of a gentleman by birth, education, and behaviour; and yet
(so unlucky had the circumstances of my life fallen out) I should find
it a very hard matter to make good my pretensions even to these,
especially to the last, which was the most essential. Miss Williams was
as sensible as I of this my disadvantage, but comforted me with
observing that, when once a woman has bestowed her affections on a man,
she cannot help judging of him in all respects with a partiality easily
influenced in his favour: she remarked that, although some situations
of my life had been low, yet none of them had been infamous; that my
indigence had been the crime not of me, but of fortune; and that the
miseries I had undergone, by improving the faculties both of mind and
body, qualified me the more for any dignified station; and would of
consequence recommend me to the good graces of any sensible woman: she
therefore advised me to be always open and unreserved to the inquiries
of my mistress, without unnecessarily betraying the meanest occurrences
of my fate; and trust to the strength of her love and reflection for
the rest.

The sentiments of this sensible young woman on this, as well as on
almost every other subject, perfectly agreed with mine. I thanked her
for the care she took of my interests, and, promising to behave myself
according to her directions we parted, after she had assured me that I
depend upon her best offices with her mistress, and that she would from
time to time communicate to me such intelligence as she could procure,
relating to my flame. Having dressed myself to the best advantage, I
waited for the time of dinner with the most fearful impatience; and, as
the hour drew near, my heart beat with such increased velocity, and my
spirits contracted such disorder, that I began to suspect my
resolution, and even to wish myself disengaged. At last Mr. Freeman
called at my lodgings in his way, and I accompanied him to the house
where all my happiness was deposited. We were very kindly received by
the squire, who sat smoking his pipe in a parlour, and asked if we
chose to drink any thing before dinner: though I never had more
occasion for a cordial, I was ashamed to accept his offer, which was
also refused, by my friend. We sat down, however, entered into
conversation, which lasted half-an hour, so that I had time to
recollect myself; and (so capricious were my thoughts) even to hope
that Narcissa would not appear—when, all of a sudden, a servant coming
in, gave us notice that dinner was upon the table, and my perturbation
returned with such violence that I could scarcely conceal it from the
company, as I ascended the staircase. When I entered the dining-room,
the first object that saluted my ravished eyes was the divine Narcissa,
blushing like Aurora, adorned with all the graces that meekness,
innocence, and beauty can diffuse! I was seized with a giddiness, my
knees tottered and I scarce had strength enough to perform the ceremony
of salutation, when her brother, slapping me on the shoulder, cried,
“Measure Randan, that there is my sister.” I approached her with
eagerness and fear; but in the moment of our embrace, my soul was
agonized with rapture! It was a lucky circumstance for us both, that my
entertainer was not endued with an uncommon stock of penetration; for
our mutual confusion was so manifest that Mr. Freeman perceived it, and
as we went home together, congratulated me on my good fortune. But so
far was Bruin from entertaining the least suspicion, that he encouraged
me to begin a conversation with my mistress in a language unknown to
him, by telling her, that he had a gentleman who could jabber with her
in French and other foreign lingoes as fast as she pleased; then,
turning to me, said, “Odds bobs! I wish you would hold discourse with
her in your French or Italian, and tell me if she understands it as
well as she would be thought to do. There’s her aunt and she will
chatter together whole days in it, and I can’t have a mouthful of
English for love or money.” I consulted the look of my amiable mistress
and found her averse to his proposal, which indeed she declined with a
sweetness of denial peculiar to herself, as a piece of disrespect to
that part of the company which did not understand the language in
question. As I had the happiness of sitting opposite to her, I feasted
my eyes much more than my palate which she tempted in vain with the
most delicious bits carved by her fair hand, and recommended by her
persuasive tongue; but all my other appetites were swallowed up in
immensity of my love, which I fed by gazing incessantly on the
delightful object. Dinner was scarcely ended, when the squire became
very drowsy, and after several dreadful yawns, got up, stretched
himself, took two or three turns across the room, begged we would allow
him to take a short nap, and, having laid a strong injunction on his
sister to detain us till his return, went to his repose without further
ceremony. He had not been gone many minutes, when Freeman, guessing the
situation of my heart, and thinking he could not do me a greater favour
than to leave me alone with Narcissa, pretended to recollect himself
all of a sudden, and, starting up, begged the lady pardon for
half-an-hour, for he had unluckily remembered an engagement of some
consequence, that he must perform at that instant: so saying, he took
his leave, promising to come back time enough for tea, leaving my
mistress and me in great confusion.

Now that I enjoyed an opportunity of disclosing the paintings of my
soul, I had not the power to use it. I studied many pathetic
declarations, but, when I attempted to give them utterance, my tongue
denied its office and she sat silent with a downcast look full of
anxious alarm, her bosom heaving with expectation of some great event.
At length I endeavoured to put an end to this solemn pause, and began
with, “It is very surprising, madam, madam”—here the sound dying away,
I made a full stop; while Narcissa, starting, blushed, and, with a
timid accent answered, “Sir?” Confounded at this note of interrogation,
I pronounced with the most sheepish bashfulness, “Madam!” To which she
replied, “I beg pardon—I thought you had spoken to me.” Another pause
ensued—I made another effort, and, though my voice faltered very much
at the beginning, made shift to express myself in this manner: “I say,
madam, it is very surprising that love should act so inconsistently
with itself, as to deprive its votaries of the use of their faculties,
when they have most need of them. Since the happy occasion of being
alone with you presented itself, I have made many unsuccessful attempts
to declare a passion for the loveliest of her sex—a passion which took
possession of my soul, while my cruel fate compelled me to wear a
servile disguise so unsuitable to my birth, sentiments, and let me add,
my deserts; yet favourable in one respect, as it furnished me with
opportunities of seeing and adoring your perfections. Yes, madam, it
was then your dear idea entered my bosom, where it has lived unimpaired
in the midst of numberless cares, and animated me against a thousand
dangers and calamities!”

While I spoke thus, she concealed her face with her fan, and when I
ceased speaking, recovering herself from the most beautiful confusion,
told me she thought herself very much obliged by my favourable opinion
of her, and that she was very sorry to hear I had been unfortunate.
Encouraged by this gentle reply, I proceeded, owned myself sufficiently
recompensed by her kind compassion for what I had undergone, and
declared the future happiness of my life depended solely upon her.
“Sir,” said she, “I should be very ungrateful, if after the signal
protection you once afforded me, I should refuse to contribute towards
your happiness in any reasonable condescension.” Transported at this
acknowledgment I threw myself at her feet, and begged she would regard
my passion with a favourable eye. She was alarmed at my behaviour,
entreated me to rise lest her brother should discover me in that
posture, and to spare her for the present upon a subject for which she
was altogether unprepared. In consequence of this remonstrance, I rose,
assuring her I would rather die than disobey her: but in the meantime
begged her to consider how precious the minutes of this opportunity
were, and what restraint I put upon my inclinations, in sacrificing
them to her desire. She smiled with unspeakable sweetness, and said
there would be no want of opportunities, provided I could maintain the
good opinion her brother had conceived of me, and I, enchanted by her
charms, seized her hand, which I well nigh devoured with kisses. But
she checked my boldness with a severity of countenance, and desired I
would not so far forget myself to her, as to endanger the esteem she
had for me; she reminded me of our being almost strangers to each
other, and of the necessity there was for her knowing me better, before
she could take any resolution in my favour; and, in short, mingled so
much good sense and complacency in her reproof, that I became as much
enamoured of her understanding as I had been before of her beauty, and
asked pardon for my presumption with the utmost reverence of
conviction. She forgave my offence with her usual affability, and
sealed my pardon with a look so full of bewitching tenderness, that,
for some minutes, my senses were lost in ecstacy! I afterwards
endeavoured to regulate my behaviour according to her desire, and turn
the conversation upon a more indifferent subject; but her presence was
an insurmountable obstacle to my design; while I beheld so much
excellence, I found it impossible to call my attention from the
contemplation of it! I gazed with unutterable fondness! I grew mad with
admiration! “My condition is insupportable!” cried I: “I am distracted
with passion! Why are you so exquisitely fair?—why are you so
enchantingly good?—why has nature dignified you with charms so much
above the standard of woman? and, wretch that I am, how dare my
unworthiness aspire to the enjoyment of such perfection!”

She was startled at my ravings, reasoned down my transport, and by her
irresistible eloquence, soothed my soul into a state of tranquil
felicity; but, lest I might suffer a relapse, industriously promoted
other subjects to entertain my imagination. She chid me for having
omitted to inquire about her aunt who (she assured me), in the midst of
all her absence of temper, and detachment from common affairs, often
talked of me with uncommon warmth. I professed my veneration for the
good lady, excused my omission, by imputing it to the violence of my
love, which engrossed my whole soul, and desired to know the situation
of her health. Upon which, the amiable Narcissa repeated what I had
heard before of her marriage, with all the tenderness for her
reputation that the subject would admit of; told me she lived with her
husband hard by, and was so much afflicted with the dropsy, and wasted
by a consumption, that she had small hopes of her recovery. Having
expressed my sorrow for her distemper, I questioned her about my good
friend, Mrs. Sagely, who, I learned to my great satisfaction, was in
good health, and who had by the encomiums she bestowed upon me after I
was gone, confirmed the favourable impression my behaviour at parting
had made on Narcissa’s heart. This circumstance introduced an inquiry
into the conduct of Sir Timothy Thicket, who (she informed me) had
found means to incense her brother so much against me that she found it
impossible to undeceive him: but, on the contrary, suffered very much
in her own character by his scandalous insinuations; that the whole
parish was alarmed, and actually in pursuit of me; so that she had been
in the utmost consternation on my account, well knowing how little my
own innocence and her testimony would have weighed with the ignorance,
prejudice, and brutality of those who must have judged me, had I been
apprehended; that Sir Timothy, having been seized with a fit of
apoplexy, from which with great difficulty he was recovered, began to
be apprehensive of death, and to prepare himself accordingly for that
great event; as a step to which he sent for her brother, owned with
great contrition the brutal design he had upon her, and in consequence
acquitted me of the assault, robbery, and correspondence with her,
which he had laid to my charge; after which confession he lived about a
month in a languishing condition, and was carried off by a second
assault.

Every word that this dear creature spoke, riveted the chains with which
she held me enslaved! My mischievous fancy began to work, and the
tempest of my passion to wake again, when the return of Freeman
destroyed the tempting opportunity, and enabled me to quell the rising
tumult. A little while after, the squire staggered into the room,
rubbing his eyes, and called for his tea, which he drank out of a small
bowl, qualified with brandy; while we took it in the usual way,
Narcissa left us in order to visit her aunt; and when Freeman and I
proposed to take our leave, the foxhunter insisted on our spending the
evening at his house with such obstinacy of affection, that we were
obliged to comply. For my own part, I should have been glad of the
invitation, by which, in all likelihood, I should be blessed with more
of his sister’s company, had I not been afraid of risking her esteem,
by entering into a debauch of drinking with him, which, from the
knowledge of his character, I foresaw would happen: but there was no
remedy. I was forced to rely upon the strength of my constitution,
which I hoped would resist intoxication longer than the squire’s, and
to trust to the good nature and discretion of my mistress for the rest.

Our entertainer, resolving to begin by times, ordered the table to be
furnished with liquor and glasses immediately after tea, but we
absolutely refused to set in for drinking so soon; and prevailed upon
him to pass away an hour or two at whist, in which we engaged as soon
as Narcissa returned. The savage and I happened to be partners at
first, and, as my thoughts were wholly employed in a more interesting
game, I played so ill that he lost all patience, swore bitterly, and
threatened to call for wine, if they would not grant him another
associate. This desire was gratified, and Narcissa and I were of a
side; he won for the same reason that made him lose before; I was
satisfied, my lovely partner did not repine, and the time slipped away
very agreeably, until we were told that supper was served in another
room.

The squire was enraged to find the evening so unprofitably spent, and
wreaked his vengeance on the cards, which he tore, and committed to the
flames with many execrations; threatening to make us redeem our loss
with a large glass and quick circulation; and indeed we had no sooner
supped, and my charmer withdrawn, than he began to put his threat in
execution. Three bottles of port (for he drank no other sort of wine)
were placed before us, with as many water glasses, which were
immediately filled to the brim, after his example, by each out of his
respective allowance, and emptied in a trice to the best in
Christendom. Though I swallowed this, and the next, as fast as the
glass could be replenished, without hesitation or show of reluctance, I
perceived that my brain would not be able to bear many bumpers of this
sort, and dreading the perseverance of a champion who began with such
vigour, I determined to make up for the deficiency of my strength by a
stratagem, which I actually put in practice when the second course of
bottles was called for. The wine being strong and heady, I was already
a good deal discomposed by the dispatch we had made. Freeman’s eyes
began to reel, and Bruin himself was elevated into a song, which he
uttered with great vociferation. When I therefore saw the second round
brought in, I assumed a gay air, entertained him with a French catch on
the subject of drinking, which, though he did rot understand it,
delighted him highly; and, telling him your choice spirits at Paris
never troubled themselves with glasses, asked if he had not a bowl or
cup in the house that would contain a whole quart of wine. “Odds
niggers!” cried he, “I have a silver candle cup that holds just the
quantity, for all the world; fetch it hither, Numps.” The vessel being
produced, I bade him decant his bottle into it, which he having done, I
nodded in a very deliberate manner, and said, “Pledge you.” He stared
at me for some time, and crying, “What! all at one pull, Measter
Randan?” I answered, “At one pull, Sir, you are no milk-sop—we shall do
you justice.” “Shall you?” said he, shaking me by the hand; “odds then,
I’ll see it out, an’t were a mile to the bottom: here’s to our better
acquaintance, measter Randan,” So saying, he applied it to his lips,
and emptied it in a breath. I knew the effect of it would be almost
instantaneous; therefore taking the cup, began to discharge my bottle
into it, telling him he was now qualified to drink with the Cham of
Tartary. I had no sooner pronounced these words than he took umbrage at
them, and after several attempts to spit, made shift to stutter, “A f—t
for your Chams of T—Tartary! I am a f—f—freeborn Englishman, worth
th—three thousand a-year, and v—value no man, d—me.” Then, dropping his
jaw, and fixing his eyes, he hiccuped aloud, and fell upon the floor as
mute as a flounder. Mr. Freeman, heartily glad at his defeat, assisted
me in carrying him to bed, where we left him to the care of his
servants, and went home to our respective habitations, congratulating
each other on our good fortune.




CHAPTER LVII


Miss Williams informs me of Narcissa’s Approbation of my Flame—I
appease the Squire—write to my Mistress—am blessed with an Answer—beg
Leave of her Brother to dance with her at a Ball—obtain his Consent and
hers—enjoy a private Conversation with her—am perplexed with
Reflections—have the Honour of appearing her Partner at a Ball—we are
complimented by a certain Nobleman—he discovers some Symptoms of a
Passion for Narcissa—I am stung with Jealousy—Narcissa, alarmed,
retires—I observe Melinda in the company—the Squire is captivated by
her Beauty


I was met next morning at the usual place by Miss Williams, who gave me
joy of the progress I had made in the affection of her mistress, and
blessed me with an account of that dear creature’s conversation with
her, after she had retired the night before from our company. I could
scarce believe her information, when she recounted her expressions in
my favour, so much more warm and passionate were they than my most
sanguine hopes had presaged; and was particularly pleased to hear that
she approved of my behaviour to her brother after she withdrew.
Transported at the news of my happiness, I presented my ring to the
messenger as a testimony of my gratitude and satisfaction; but she was
above such mercenary considerations, and refused my compliment with
some resentment, saying, she was not a little mortified to see my
opinion of her so low and contemptible. I did myself a piece of justice
by explaining my behaviour on this head, and to convince her of my
esteem, promised to be ruled by her directions in the prosecution of
the whole affair, which I had so much at heart, that the repose of my
life depended upon the consequence.

As I fervently wished for another interview, where I might pour out the
effusion of my love without danger of being interrupted, and perhaps
reap some endearing return from the queen of my desires, I implored her
advice and assistance in promoting this event: but she gave me to
understand, that Narcissa would make no precipitate compliances of this
kind, and I would do well to cultivate her brother’s acquaintance, in
the course of which I should not want opportunities of removing that
reserve which my mistress thought herself obliged to maintain during
the infancy of our correspondence. In the meantime she promised to tell
her lady that I had endeavoured by presents and persuasions, to prevail
upon her (Miss Williams) to deliver a letter from me, which she had
refused to charge herself with, until she should know Narcissa’s
sentiments of the matter; and said, by these means she did not doubt of
being able to open a literary communication between us, which could not
fail of introducing more intimate connections.

I approved of her counsel, and, our appointment being renewed for the
next day, left her with an intent of falling upon some method of being
reconciled to the squire, who, I supposed, would be offended with the
trick we had put upon him. With this view I consulted Freeman, who,
from his knowledge of the foxhunter’s disposition, assured me there was
no other method of pacifying him, than that of sacrificing ourselves
for one night to an equal match with him in drinking. This expedient I
found myself necessitated to comply with for the interest of my
passion, and therefore determined to commit the debauch at my own
lodgings, that I might run no risk of being discovered by Narcissa, in
a state of brutal degeneracy. Mr. Freeman, who was to be of the party,
went, at my desire, to the squire, in order to engage him, while I took
care to furnish myself for his reception. My invitation was accepted,
my guests honoured me with their company in the evening, when Bruin
gave me to understand that he had drunk many tons of wine in his life,
but was never served such a trick as I had played upon him the night
before. I promised to atone for my trespass, and, having ordered to
every man his bottle, began the contest with a bumper to the health of
Narcissa. The toasts circulated with great devotion, the liquor began
to operate, our mirth grew noisy, and, as Freeman said, I had the
advantage of drinking small French claret, the savage was effectually
tamed before our senses were in the least affected, and carried home in
an apoplexy of drunkenness.

I was next morning, as usual, favoured with a visit from my kind and
punctual confidante, who, telling me she was permitted to receive my
letters for her mistress, I took up the pen immediately, and, following
the first dictates of my passion, wrote as follows:

“Dear Madam,
    “Were it possible for the powers of utterance to reveal the soft
    emotions of my soul, the fond anxiety, the glowing hopes, the
    chilling flame, that rule my breast by turns, I should need no
    other witness than this paper, to evince the purity and ardour of
    that flame your charms have kindled in my heart, But alas!
    expression wrongs my love! I am inspired with conceptions that no
    language can convey! Your beauty fills me with wonder, your
    understanding with ravishment, and your goodness with adoration! I
    am transported with desire, distracted with doubts, and tortured
    with impatience. Suffer me then, lovely arbitress of my fate, to
    approach you in person, to breathe in soft murmurs my passion to
    your ear, to offer the sacrifice of a heart overflowing with the
    most genuine and disinterested love, to gaze with ecstacy on the
    divine object of my wishes, to hear the music of her enchanting
    tongue, and to rejoice in her smiles of approbation, which will
    banish the most intolerable suspense from the bosom of


“Your enraptured, R— R—.”


Having finished this effusion, I committed it to the care of my
faithful friend, with an injunction to second my entreaty with all her
eloquence and influence, and in the meantime went to dress, with an
intention of visiting Mrs. Snapper and Miss, whom I had utterly
neglected, and indeed almost forgotten, since my dear Narcissa had
resumed the empire of my soul. The old gentlewoman received me very
kindly, and Miss affected a frankness and gaiety which, however, I
could easily perceive was forced and dissembled: among other things,
she pretended to joke me upon my passion for Narcissa, which she
averred was no secret, and asked if I intended to dance with her at the
next assembly. I was a good deal concerned to find myself become the
town talk on this subject, lest the squire, having notice of my
inclinations, should disapprove of them, and, by breaking off all
correspondence with me, deprive me of the opportunities I now enjoyed.
But I resolved to use the interest I had with him, while it lasted; and
that very night, meeting him occasionally, asked his permission to
solicit her company at the ball, which he very readily granted, to my
inexpressible satisfaction.

Having been kept awake the greatest part of the night by a thousand
delightful reveries that took possession of my fancy, I got up by
times, and, flying to the place of rendezvous, had in a little time the
pleasure of seeing Miss Williams approach with a smile on her
countenance, which I interpreted into a good omen. Neither was I
mistaken in my presage. She presented me with a letter from the idol of
my soul, which, after having kissed it devoutly, I opened with the
utmost eagerness, and was blessed with her approbation in these terms:

“Sir,
    “To say I look upon you with indifference would be a piece of
    dissimulation which I think no decorum requires, and no custom can
    justify. As my heart never felt an impression that my tongue was
    ashamed to declare, I will not scruple to own myself pleased with
    your passion; confident of your integrity, and so well convinced of
    my own discretion, that I should not hesitate in granting you the
    interview you desire, were I not overawed by the prying curiosity
    of a malicious world, the censure of which might be fatally
    prejudicial to the reputation of


“Your Narcissa.”


No anchorite in the ecstacy of devotion ever adored a relic with more
fervour than that with which I kissed this inimitable proof of my
charmer’s candour, generosity, and affection! I read it over a hundred
times, was ravished with her confession in the beginning; but the
subscription of Your Narcissa yielded me such delight as I had never
felt before! My happiness was still increased by Miss Williams, who
blessed me with a repetition of her lady’s tender expressions in my
favour, when she received and read my letter. In short, I had all the
reason in the world to believe that this gentle creature’s bosom was
possessed by a passion for me, as warm, though perhaps not so impetuous
as mine for her.

I informed my friend of the squire’s consent to my dancing with
Narcissa at the ball and desired her to tell her mistress, that I would
do myself the honour of visiting her in the afternoon, in consequence
of his permission, when I hoped to find her as indulgent as her brother
had been complaisant in that particular. Miss Williams expressed a good
deal of joy at hearing I was so much in favour with the foxhunter, and
ventured to assure me, that my visit would be very agreeable to my
mistress, the rather because Bruin was engaged to dine abroad. This was
a circumstance which, I scarce need say, pleased me. I went immediately
to the Long Room, where I found him, and, affecting to know nothing of
his engagement, told him, I would do myself the pleasure to wait upon
him in the afternoon, and to present his sister with a ticket for the
ball. He shook me by the hand, according to custom, and, giving me to
understand that he was to dine abroad, desired me to go and drink tea
with Narcissa notwithstanding, and promised to prepare her for my visit
in the meantime.

Everything succeeding thus to my wish, I waited with incredible
impatience for the time, which no sooner arrived than I hastened to the
scene, which my fancy had preoccupied long before. I was introduced
accordingly to the dear enchantress, whom I found accompanied by Miss
Williams, who, on pretence of ordering tea, retired at my approach.
This favourable accident, which alarmed my whole soul, disordered her
also. I found myself actuated by an irresistible impulse; I advanced to
her with eagerness and awe; and, profiting by the confusion that
prevailed over her, clasped the fair angel in my arms, and imprinted a
glowing kiss upon her lips, more soft and fragrant than the dewy
rosebud just bursting from the stem! Her face was in an instant covered
with blushes, her eyes sparkled with resentment; I threw myself at her
feet, and implored her pardon. Her love became advocate in my cause;
her look softened into forgiveness; she raised me up, and chid me with
so much sweetness of displeasure that I could have been tempted to
repeat the offence, had not the coming in of the servant with the
tea-board prevented my presumption. While we were subject to be
interrupted or overheard, we conversed about the approaching ball, at
which she promised to grace me as a partner, but, when the equipage was
removed, and we were left alone, I resumed the more interesting theme,
and expressed myself with such transport and agitation, that my
mistress, fearing I should commit some extravagance, rang the bell for
her maid, whom she detained in the room, as a check upon my vivacity. I
was not sorry for this precaution, because I could unbosom myself
without reserve before Miss Williams, who was the confidante of us
both. I therefore gave a loose to the inspirations of my passion, which
operated so successfully upon the tender affections of Narcissa, that
she laid aside the constraint she had hitherto worn, and blessed me
with the most melting declaration of her mutual flame! It was
impossible for me to forbear taking the advantage of this endearing
condescension. She now gently yielded to my embraces; while I,
encircling all that I held dear within my arms, tasted in advance the
joys of that paradise I hoped in a little time wholly to possess! We
spent the afternoon in all the ecstacy of hope that the most fervent
love exchanged by mutual vows could inspire; and Miss Williams was so
much affected with our chaste caresses, which recalled the sad
remembrance of what she was, that her eyes were filled with tears.

The evening being pretty far advanced, I forced myself from the dear
object of my flame, who indulged me in a tender embrace at parting,
and, repairing to my lodgings, communicated to my friend Strap every
circumstance of my happiness, which filled him with so much pleasure,
that it ran over at his eyes; and he prayed heartily, that no envious
devil might, as formerly, dash the cup of blessing from my lip. When I
reflected on what had happened, and especially on the unreserved
protestations of Narcissa’s love, I could not help being amazed at her
omitting to inquire into the particular circumstances of life and
fortune of one whom she had favoured with her affection, and I began to
be a little anxious about the situation of her finances; well knowing
that I should do an irreparable injury to the person my soul held most
dear, if I should espouse her without being able to support her in the
rank which was certainly her due. I had heard, indeed, while I served
her aunt, that her father had left her a considerable sum; and that
everybody believed she would inherit the greatest part of her
kinswoman’s dowry, but I did not know how far she might be restricted
by the old gentleman’s will in the enjoyment of what he left her: and I
was too well informed of the virtuoso’s late conduct, to think my
mistress could have any expectation from that quarter. I confided,
however, in the good sense and policy of my charmer, who, I was sure,
would not consent to unite her fate with mine, before she had fully
considered and provided for the consequence.

The ball night being arrived, I dressed myself in a suit I had reserved
for some grand occasion; and, having drunk tea with Narcissa and her
brother, conducted my angel to the scene, where she, in a moment,
eclipsed all her female competitors for beauty, and attracted the
admiration of the whole assembly. My heart dilated with pride on this
occasion, and my triumph rejected all bounds, when, after we had danced
together, a certain nobleman, remarkable for his figure, and influence
in the beau monde, came up, and in the hearing of all present, honoured
us with a very particular compliment upon our accomplishments and
appearance; but this transport was soon checked, when I perceived his
lordship attach himself with great assiduity to my mistress, and say
some warm things, which, I thought, savoured too much of passion. It
was then I began to feel the pangs of jealousy; I dreaded the power and
address of my rival; I sickened at his discourse; when she opened her
lips to answer, my heart died within me; when she smiled, I felt the
pains of the damned! I was enraged at his presumption: I cursed her
complaisance: at length he quitted her, and went to the other side of
the room. Narcissa, suspecting nothing of the rage that inflamed me,
put some questions to me as soon as he was gone, to which I made no
reply, but assumed a grim look, which too well denoted the agitation of
my breast, and surprised her not a little. She no sooner observed my
emotion than she changed colour, and asked what ailed me? but before I
could make answer, her brother, pulling me by the sleeve, bade me take
notice of a lady who sat fronting us, whom I immediately, to my vast
astonishment, distinguished to be Melinda, accompanied by her mother,
and an elderly gentleman, whom I did not know. “Wounds! Mr. Randan,”
cried the squire, “is she not a delicate piece of stuff? ’Sdeath! I
have a good mind—if I thought she was a single person.”

Notwithstanding the perplexity I was in, I had reflection enough to
foresee that my passion might suffer greatly by the presence of this
lady, who, in all probability, would revenge herself upon me, for
having formerly disgraced her, by spreading reports to my prejudice. I
was therefore alarmed at these symptoms of the Squire’s admiration; and
for some time did not know what reply to make, when he asked my opinion
of her beauty; at length I came to a determination, and told him that
her name was Melinda, that she had a fortune of ten thousand pounds,
and was said to be under promise of marriage to a certain lord, who
deferred his nuptials a few months, until he should be of age. I
thought this piece of intelligence, which I had myself invented, would
have hindered him effectually from entertaining any further thoughts of
her; but I was egregiously mistaken. The foxhunter had too much
self-sufficiency to despair of success against any competitor on earth.
He therefore made light of her engagement, saying, with a smile of
self-approbation, “Mayhap she will change her mind; what signifies his
being a lord? I think myself as good a man as e’er a lord in
Christendom, and I’ll see if a commoner worth three thousand a year
won’t serve her turn.” This determination startled me not a little; I
knew he would soon discover the contrary of what I advanced; and as I
believed he would find her ear open to his addresses, did not doubt of
meeting with every obstacle in my amour that her malice could invent,
and her influence execute. This reflection increased my chagrin—my
vexation was evident. Narcissa insisted on going home immediately: and,
as I led her to the door, her noble admirer, with a look full of
languishment, directed to her a profound bow, which stung me to the
soul. Before she went into the chair, she asked, with an appearance of
concern, what was the matter with me? and I could pronounce no more
than “By heaven, I am distracted!”




CHAPTER LVIII


Tortured with Jealousy, I go Home, and abuse Strap—receive a Message
from Narcissa, in Consequence of which I hasten to her Apartment, where
her endearing Assurances banish all my Doubts and Apprehensions—in my
Retreat discover Somebody in the Dark, whom, suspecting to be a Spy, I
resolve to kill, but, to my great Surprise, am convinced of his being
no other than Strap—Melinda slanders me—I become acquainted with Lord
Quiverwit, who endeavours to sound me with regard to Narcissa—the
Squire is introduced to his Lordship, and grows cold towards me—I learn
from my Confidante, that this Nobleman professes honourable Love to my
Mistress, who continues faithful to me, notwithstanding the scandalous
Reports she had heard to my Prejudice—I am mortified with an Assurance
that her whole Fortune depends upon the Pleasure of her Brother—Mr.
Freeman condoles me on the Decline of my Character, which I vindicate
so much to his satisfaction, that he undertakes to combat Fame on my
behalf


Having uttered this exclamation, at which she sighed, I went home in
the condition of a frantic Bedlamite: and, finding the fire in my
apartment almost extinguished, vented my fury upon poor Strap, whose
ear I pinched with such violence, that he roared hideously with pain;
and, when I quitted my hold, looked so foolishly aghast, that no
unconcerned spectator could have seen him without being seized with an
immoderate fit of laughter. It is true, I was soon sensible of the
injury I had done, and asked pardon for the outrage I had committed;
upon which my faithful valet, shaking his head, said, “I forgive you,
and may God forgive you!” But he could not help shedding some tears at
my unkindness. I felt unspeakable remorse for what I had done, cursed
my own ingratitude, and considered his tears as a reproach that my
soul, in its present disturbance, could not bear. It set all my
passions into a ferment: I swore horrible oaths without meaning or
application. I foamed at the mouth, kicked the chairs about the room,
and played abundance of mad pranks that frightened my friend almost out
of his senses. At length my transport subsided, I became melancholy,
and wept insensibly.

During this state of dejection, I was surprised with the appearance of
Miss Williams, whom Strap, blubbering all the while, had conducted into
the chamber without giving me previous notice of her approach. She was
extremely affected with my condition, which she had learned from him,
begged me to moderate my passion, suspend my conjectures, and follow
her to Narcissa, who desired to see me forthwith. That dear name
operated upon me like a charm! I started up, and, without opening my
lips, was conducted into her apartment through the garden, which we
entered by a private door. I found the adorable creature in tears; I
was melted at the sight—we continued silent for some time—my heart was
too full to speak—her snowy bosom heaved with fond resentment; at last
she sobbing cried, “What have I done to disoblige you?” My heart was
pierced with the tender question. I drew near with the utmost reverence
of affection. I fell upon my knees before her, and, kissing her hand,
exclaimed, “Oh! thou art all goodness and perfection! I am undone by
want of merit; I am unworthy to possess thy charms, which heaven hath
destined for the arms of some more favourite being.” She guessed the
cause of my disquiet, upbraided me gently for my suspicion, and gave me
such flattering assurances of her eternal fidelity, that all my doubts
and fears forsook me, and peace and satisfaction reigned within my
breast.

At midnight I left the fair nymph to her repose, and, being let out by
Miss Williams at the garden gate by which I entered, began to explore
my way homeward in the dark, when I heard at my back a noise like that
of a baboon when he mews and chatters. I turned instantly, and,
perceiving something black, concluded I was discovered by some spy,
employed to watch for that purpose; aroused at this conjecture, by
which the reputation of the virtuous Narcissa appeared in jeopardy, I
drew my sword, and would have sacrificed him to her fame, had not the
voice of Strap restrained my arm, it was with great difficulty he could
pronounce, “D—d—d-do! mum—um—um—murder me if you please.” Such an
effect had the cold upon his jaws, that his teeth rattled like a pair
of castanets. Pleased to be thus undeceived, I laughed at his
consternation, and asked what brought him thither? Upon which he gave
me to understand, that his concern for me had induced him to follow me
to that place, where the same reason had detained him till now, and he
frankly owned, that, in spite of the esteem he had for Miss Williams he
began to be very uneasy about me, considering the disposition in which
I went abroad; and, if I had stayed much longer, would certainly have
alarmed the neighbourhood in my behalf. The knowledge of this his
intention confounded me. I represented to him the mischievous
consequences that would have attended such a rash action, and,
cautioning him severely against any such design for the future,
concluded my admonition with an assurance, that, in case he should ever
act so madly, I would, without hesitation, put him to death. “Have a
little patience!” cried he, in a lamentable tone; “your displeasure
will do the business, without your committing murder.” I was touched
with this reproach; and, as soon as we got home, made it my business to
appease him, by explaining the cause of that transport during which I
had used him so unworthily.

Next day when I went into the Long Room, I observed several whispers
circulate all of a sudden, and did not doubt that Melinda had been busy
with my character; but I consoled myself with the love of Narcissa,
upon which I rested with the most perfect confidence; and going up to
the rowly-powly table, won a few pieces from my suspected rival, who,
with an easy politeness, entered into conversation with me, and,
desiring my company to the coffee-house, treated me with tea and
chocolate. I remembered Strutwell, and guarded against his insinuating
behaviour; nor was my suspicion wrong placed; he artfully turned the
discourse upon Narcissa, and endeavoured by hinting at an intrigue he
pretended to be engaged in elsewhere, to learn what connection there
was between her and me. But all his finesse was ineffectual, I was
convinced of his dissimulation, and gave such general answers to his
inquiries, that he was forced to drop the subject, and talk of
something else.

While we conversed in this manner, the savage came in with another
gentleman, who introduced him to his lordship, and he was received with
such peculiar marks of distinction, that I was persuaded the courtier
intended to use him in some shape or other; and from thence I drew an
unlucky omen. But I had more cause to be dismayed the following day,
when I saw the squire in company with Melinda and her mother, who
honoured me with several disdainful glances; and when I afterwards
threw myself in his way, instead of the cordial shake of the hand, he
returned my salute with a cold repetition of “Servant, servant!” which
he pronounced with such indifference or rather contempt, that if he had
not been Narcissa’s brother, I should have affronted him in public.

These occurrences disturbed me not a little; I foresaw the brooding
storm, and armed myself with resolution for the occasion; but Narcissa,
being at stake, I was far from being resigned. I could have renounced
every other comfort of life with some degree of fortitude, but the
prospect of losing her disabled all my philosophy, and tortured my soul
into madness.

Miss Williams found me, next morning, full of anxious tumult, which did
not abate when she told me that my Lord Quiverwit, having professed
honourable intentions, had been introduced to my lovely mistress by her
brother, who had, at the same time, from the information of Melinda,
spoken of me as an Irish fortune-hunter, without either birth or
estate; who supported myself in the appearance of a gentleman by
sharping and other infamous practices; and who was of such an obscure
origin, that I did not even know my own extraction. Though I expected
all this malice, I could not hear it with temper, especially as truth
was so blended with falsehood in the assertion, that it would be almost
impossible to separate the one from the other in my vindication. But I
said nothing on this head, being impatient to know how Narcissa had
been affected with the discovery. That generous creature, far from
believing these imprecations, was no sooner withdrawn with her
confidante, than she inveighed with great warmth against the
malevolence of the world, to which only she ascribed the whole of what
had been said to my disadvantage, and, calling every circumstance of my
behaviour to her into review before her, found everything so polite,
honourable, and disinterested, that she could not harbour the least
doubt of my being the gentleman I assumed. “I have indeed,” said she,
“purposely forborne to ask the particulars of his life, lest the
recapitulation of some misfortunes, which he has undergone, should give
him pain; and, as to the article of his fortune, I own myself equally
afraid of inquiring into it, and of discovering the state of my own,
lest we should find ourselves both unhappy in the explanation; for,
alas! my provision is conditional, and depends entirely on my marrying
with my brother’s consent.”

I was thunderstruck with this intelligence, the light forsook my eyes,
the colour vanished from my cheeks, and I remained in a state of
universal trepidation! My female friend, perceiving my disorder,
encouraged me with assurances of Narcissa’s constancy, and the hope of
some accident favourable to our love; and, as a further consolation,
gave me to understand, that she had acquainted my mistress with the
outlines of my life: and that, although she was no stranger to the
present low state of my finances, her love and esteem were rather
increased than diminished by the knowledge of my circumstances. I was
greatly comforted by this assurance, which saved me a world of
confusion and anxiety; for I must have imparted my situation one day to
Narcissa, and this task I could not have performed without shame and
disorder.

As I did not doubt that by this time the scandalous aspersions of
Melinda were diffused all over the town, I resolved to collect my whole
strength of assurance, to browbeat the efforts of her malice, and to
publish her adventure with the frenchified barber by way of reprisal.
In the meantime, having promised to be at the garden-gate about
midnight, Miss Williams took her leave, bidding me repose myself
entirely on the affection of my dear Narcissa, which was as perfect as
inviolable. Before I went abroad, I was visited by Freeman, who came on
purpose to inform me of the infamous stories that were raised at my
expense. I heard them with great temper, and in my turn disclosed
everything that had happened between Melinda and me; and among other
circumstances entertained him with the story of the barber, letting him
know what share his friend Banter had in that affair. He was convinced
of the injury my reputation had suffered; and, no longer doubting the
fountain from whence this deluge of slander had flowed upon me,
undertook to undeceive the town in my behalf, and roll the stream back
upon its source; but in the meantime, cautioned me from appearing in
public, while the prepossession was so strong against me, lest I should
meet with some affront that might have bad consequences.




CHAPTER LIX


I receive an extraordinary Message at the Door of the Long Room, which,
however, enter, and affront the Squire, who threatens to take the Law
of me—Rebuke Melinda for her Malice—she weeps with Vexation—Lord
Quiverwit is severe upon me—I retort his Sarcasm—am received with the
utmost Tenderness by Narcissa, who desires to hear the Story of my
Life—we vow eternal Constancy to other—I retire—am waked by a
Messenger, who brings a Challenge from Quiverwit, whom I meet, engage,
and vanquish


I thanked him for his advice, which, however, my pride and resentment
would not permit me to follow; for he no sooner left me, in order to do
justice to my character among his friends and acquaintance, than I
sallied out, and went directly to the Long Room. I was met at the door
by a servant, who presented a billet to me without a subscription,
importing that my presence was disagreeable to the company, and
desiring I would take the hint without further disturbance, and bestow
myself elsewhere for the future. This peremptory message filled me with
indignation. I followed the fellow who delivered it, and, seizing him
by the collar in presence of all the company, threatened to put him
instantly to death, if he did not discover the scoundrel who had
charged him with such an impudent commission, that I might punish him
as he deserved. The messenger, affrighted at my menaces and furious
looks, fell upon his knees, and told me, that the gentleman who ordered
him to deliver the letter was no other than Narcissa’s brother, who, at
that time, stood at the other end of the room, talking to Melinda. I
went up to him immediately, and in the hearing of his inamorata,
accosted him in these words; “Lookee, squire, were it not for one
consideration that protects you from my resentment, I would cane you
where you stand, for having had the presumption to send me this
scurrilous intimation;” which I tore to pieces and threw in his face:
at the same time darting an angry regard at his mistress, I told her, I
was sorry she had put it out of my power to compliment her upon her
invention, but at the expense of her good nature and veracity. Her
admirer, whose courage never rose, but in proportion to the wine he had
swallowed, instead of resenting my address in what is called an
honourable way, threatened to prosecute me for an assault, and took
witnesses accordingly: while she, piqued at his pusillanimous
behaviour, and enraged at the sarcasm I had uttered against her,
endeavoured to make her quarrel a public cause, and wept aloud with
spite and vexation.

The tears of a lady could not fail of attracting the notice and concern
of the spectators to whom she complained of my rudeness with great
bitterness, saying, if she were a man, I durst not use her so. The
greatest part of the gentlemen, already prejudiced against me, were
offended at the liberty I had taken, as appeared from their looks;
though none of them signified their disgust any other way except my
Lord Quiverwit, who ventured to say, with a sneer, that I was in the
right to establish my own character, of which he had now no longer any
doubt. Nettled at this severe equivocation, which raised a laugh at my
expense, I replied with some warmth, “I am proud of having in that
particular got the start of your lordship.” He made no answer to my
repartee, but with a contemptuous smile walked off, leaving me in a
very disagreeable situation. In vain did I make up to several people of
my acquaintance, whose conversation, I hoped, would banish my
confusion; everybody shunned me like a person infected, and I should
not have been able to bear my disgrace, had not the idea of the ever
faithful and fond Narcissa come to my relief. I quitted the scene of my
mortification, and, sauntering about the town, happened to wake from my
contemplation, when I found myself just opposite to a toy-shop, which I
entered, and purchased a ring set with a ruby in the form of a heart,
surrounded by diamond sparks, for which I paid ten guineas, intending
it for a present to the charmer of my soul.

I was introduced, at the hour appointed, to this divine creature, who,
notwithstanding what she had heard to my disadvantage, received me with
the utmost confidence and tenderness; and, having been informed of the
general sketches of my life by Miss Williams, expressed a desire, of
knowing the particular circumstances, which I related with great
candour, omitting, however, some things which I concluded altogether
improper for her ear, and which the reader’s reflection will easily
suggest. As my story was little else than a recital of misfortunes, the
tear of sympathy ceased not to trickle from her enchanting eyes during
the whole of the narration, which, when I had finished, she recompensed
me for my trouble with the most endearing protestations of eternal
love. She bewailed her restricted condition, as it was the means of
retarding my happiness; told me that Lord Quiverwit, by her brother’s
permission, had been to drink tea with her that very afternoon, and
actually proposed marriage; and, seeing me extremely affected with this
piece of information, offered to give me a convincing proof of her
affection, by espousing me in private, and leaving the rest to fate. I
was penetrated with this instance of her regard, but, that I might not
be outdone in generosity, resisted the bewitching temptation in
consideration of her honour and interest; at the same time I presented
my ring as a pledge of my inviolable attachment, and, on my knees,
implored Heaven to shower its curses on my head, if ever my heart
should entertain one thought unworthy of the passion I then avowed. She
received my token, gave me in return her picture in miniature,
exquisitely drawn and set in gold; and, in the same posture, called
Heaven to witness and to judge her flame. Our vows being thus
reciprocally breathed, a confidence of hope ensued, and our mutual
fondness becoming as intimate as innocence would allow, I grew
insensible of the progress of time, and it was morning before I could
tear myself from this darling of my soul! My good angel foresaw what
would happen, and permitted me to indulge myself on this occasion, in
consideration of the fatal absence I was doomed to suffer.

I went to bed immediately on my return to my lodging, and, having slept
about two hours, was waked by Strap, who in great confusion told me
there was a footman below with a letter, which he would deliver to
nobody but myself. Alarmed at this piece of news, I desired my friend
to show him into my chamber, and received the following letter, which,
he said, required an immediate answer:

“Sir,—
    “When any man injures my honour, let the difference of rank between
    us be ever so great, I am contented to wave the privilege of my
    quality, and to seek reparation from him on equal terms. The
    insolence of your reply to me yesterday, in the Long Room, I might
    have overlooked, had not your presumptive emulation in a much more
    interesting affair, and which I made this morning, concurred in
    persuading me to chastise your audacity with my sword. If you
    therefore have spirit enough to support the character you assume,
    you will not fail to follow the bearer immediately to a convenient
    place, where you shall be met by


“Quiverwit.”


Whether I was enervated by the love and favour of Narcissa, or awed by
the superior station of my antagonist, I know not, but I never had less
inclination to fight than at this time. However, finding there was a
necessity for vindicating the reputation of my mistress, as well as for
asserting my own honour, I forthwith rose, and, dressing in a hurry,
put on my sword, bade Strap attend me, and set out with my conductor,
cursing my bad fortune all the way, for having been observed in my
return from my angel; for so I interpreted his lordship’s discovery.
When I came within sight of my rival, his lacquey told me he had orders
to stop; upon which I commanded Strap to halt also, while I walked
forward; resolving, if possible, to come to an explanation with my
challenger, before we should come to battle. Nor was an opportunity
wanting; for I no sooner approached than he asked, with a stern
countenance, what business I had in Mr. Topehall’s garden so early in
the morning? “I don’t know, my lord,” said I, “how to answer a question
put to me with such magisterial haughtiness. If your lordship will
please to expostulate calmly, you will have no cause to repent of your
condescension; otherwise I am not to be intimated into any confession.”
“There is no room for denial,” answered he; “I saw you come out with my
own eyes.” “Did any other see me?” said I. “I neither know nor care,”
said he; “I want no other evidence than that of my own senses.” Pleased
to hear that the suspicion was confined to him alone, I endeavoured to
appease his jealousy, by owning an intrigue with the waiting maid: but
he had too much discernment to be so easily imposed upon, and told me
there was only one way to convince him of the truth of what I alleged,
which was no other than renouncing all claim to Narcissa upon oath, and
promising, upon honour, never to speak to her for the future.
Exasperated at this proposal, I unsheathed my sword, saying, “Heavens!
what title have you, or any man on earth, to impose such terms on me?”
He did the same, and making towards me with a contracted brow, said I
was a villain, and had dishonoured Narcissa. “He’s a villain,” I
replied, in a transport of fury, “who brands me with that imputation!
She is a thousand times more chaste than the mother that bore you; and
I will assert her honour with my heart’s blood!” So saying, I rushed
upon him with more eagerness than address, and, endeavouring to get
within his point, received a wound in my neck, which redoubled my rage.
He excelled me in temper as well as in skill, by which means he parried
my thrusts with great calmness, until I had almost exhausted my
spirits; and, when he perceived me beginning to flag, attacked me
fiercely in his turn. Finding himself, however, better opposed than he
expected, he resolved to follow his lounge, and close with me;
accordingly, his sword entered my waistcoat, on the side of the breast
bone, and, running up between my shirt and skin, appeared over my left
shoulder. I imagined that his weapon had perforated my lungs, and of
consequence that the wound was mortal; therefore, determined not to die
unrevenged, I seized his shell, which was close to my breast, before he
could disentangle his point, and, keeping it fast with my left hand,
shortened my own sword with my right, intending to run him through the
heart; but he received the thrust in the left arm, which penetrated up
to the shoulder blade. Disappointed at this expectation, and afraid
still that death would frustrate my revenge, I grappled with him, and,
being much the stronger, threw him upon the ground, where I wrested his
sword out of his hand, and, so great was my confusion, that instead of
turning the point upon him, struck out three of his foreteeth with the
hilt. In the meantime, our servants, seeing us fall, ran up to separate
and assist us; but before their approach I was upon my feet, and had
discovered that my supposed mortal wound was only a slight scratch. The
knowledge of my own safety disarmed me of a good deal of my resentment,
and I began to inquire with some concern into the situation of my
antagonist, who remained on the ground bleeding plentifully at his
mouth and arm. I helped his footman to raise him, and, having bound up
his wound with my handkerchief, assured it was not dangerous; I
likewise restored his sword, and offered to support him to his house.
He thanked me with an air of sullen dignity: and whispering that I
should hear from him soon, went away, leaning on his servant’s
shoulder.

I was surprised at this promise, which I construed into a threat, and
resolved, if ever he should call me out again, to use whatever
advantage fortune might give me over him in another manner. In the
meantime I had leisure to take notice of Strap, who seemed quite
stupified with horror: I comforted him with an assurance, that I had
received no damage, and explained the nature of this affair as we
walked homeward. By the time I had got into my apartment, I found the
wound in my neck stiff and uneasy, and a good deal of clotted blood ran
down upon my shirt; upon which I pulled off my coat and waistcoat, and
unbuttoned my collar, that I might dress it with more ease. My friend
no sooner perceived my shirt quite dyed with blood, than, imagining I
had got at least twenty thousand wounds, he cried, “O Jesus!” and fell
flat on the floor. I stopped the bleeding with a little dry lint, and,
applying a plaster over it, cleaned myself from the gore, shifted, and
dressed, while he lay senseless at my feet, so that when he recovered,
and saw me perfectly well, he could scarce believe his own eyes. Now
that the danger was passed, I was very well pleased with what had
happened, hoping that it would soon become known, and consequently
dignify my character not a little in this place. I was also proud of
having shown myself, in some shape, worthy of the love of Narcissa,
who, I was persuaded, would not think the worse of me for what I had
done.




CHAPTER LX


I am visited by Freeman, with whom I appear in Public, and am
caressed—am sent for by Lord Quiverwit, whose Presence I quit
flung—Narcissa is carried off by her Brother—I intend to pursue him,
and am dissuaded by my Friend—engage in Play, and lose all my Money—set
out for London—try my Fortune at the Gaming Table without
success—receive a letter from Narcissa—bilk my Tailor


While I entertained myself with these reflections, the news of the
duel, being communicated by some unknown channel, spread all over the
town. I was visited by Freeman, who testified his surprise at finding
me; for it was told, that Lord Quiverwit being dead of his wounds, I
had absconded, in order to avoid the cognizance of the law. I asked, if
people guessed the occasion of the quarrel; and, understanding it was
attributed to his lordship’s resentment of my reply in the Long Room,
confirmed that conjecture, glad to find Narcissa unsuspected. My
friend, after I had assured him that my antagonist was in no danger,
wished me joy of the event, than which, he said, nothing could happen
more opportunely to support the idea he had given of my character to
his friends, among whom he had been very assiduous in my behalf.

On the strength of this assurance, I went with him to the coffee-house,
where I was saluted by a great many of those very persons who had
shunned me the preceding day; and I found everybody making merry with
the story of Melinda’s French gallant. While I remained in this place,
I received a message from Lord Quiverwit, desiring, if I were not
engaged, to see me at his house.

Thither I immediately repaired, and was conducted to an apartment where
I was received by his lordship in bed. When we were left by ourselves,
he thanked me in very polite terms for having used the advantage
fortune had given me over him with such moderation, and asked pardon
for any offence his resentment might have prompted him to commit. “I
would willingly,” said he, “make you my friend; but, as it is
impossible for me to divest myself of my passion for Narcissa, I am too
well convinced of your sentiments, to think we shall ever agree on that
subject. I took the liberty, therefore, of sending for you, in order to
own candidly, that I cannot help opposing your success with that young
lady; though, at the same time I promise to regulate my opposition by
the dictates of justice and honour. This, however, I think proper to
advertise you of, that she has no independent fortune; and, if you
should even succeed in your addresses, you will have the mortification
to see her reduced to indigence, unless you have wherewithal to support
her—and I am credibly informed of your incapacity that way—nay, I will
confess, that, urged by this consideration, I have actually sent notice
to her brother of the progress I suspect you have made in her
affection, and desired him to take his precautions accordingly.”
Alarmed and provoked at this information, I told his lordship, that I
did not see how he could reconcile that piece of conduct with his
profession of open dealing, and flung away from him in a passion.

As I walked homeward, in hope of hearing from my mistress as usual by
means of Miss Williams, I was surprised with the waving of a
handkerchief from the window of a coach-and-six that passed by me at
full speed: and upon further observation, I saw a servant on horseback
riding after it, who, I knew by his livery, belonged to the squire.
Thunderstruck with this discovery, the knowledge of my misfortune
rushed all at once upon my reflection! I guessed immediately that the
signal was made by the dear hand of Narcissa, who, being hurried away
in consequence of Lord Quiverwit’s message to her brother, had no other
method of relating her distress, and imploring my assistance. Frantic
with this conjecture, I ran to my lodgings, snatched my pistols, and
ordered Strap to get post-horses, with such incoherence of speech and
disorder, that the poor valet, terrified with the suspicion of another
duel, instead of providing what I desired, went forthwith to Freeman,
who, being informed of my behaviour, came straight to my apartment, and
conjured me so pathetically to make him acquainted with the cause of my
uneasiness, that I could not refuse telling him my happiness was fled
with Narcissa, and that I must retrieve her or perish. He represented
the madness of such an undertaking, and endeavoured to divert me from
it with great strength of friendship and reason. But all his arguments
would have been ineffectual, had he not put me in mind of the
dependence I ought to have on the love of Narcissa, and the attachment
of her maid, who could not fail of finding opportunities to advertise
me of their situation; and at the same time demonstrated the injury my
charmer’s reputation must suffer from my precipitate retreat. I was
convinced and composed by these considerations: I appeared in public
with an air of tranquillity, was well received by the best company in
town, and, my misfortune taking air, condoled accordingly: while I had
the satisfaction of seeing Melinda so universally discountenanced that
she was fain to return to London, in order to avoid the scoffs and
censure of the ladies at Bath. But, though the hope of hearing from the
darling of my soul supported my spirits a little while, I began to be
very uneasy, when, at the end of several weeks I found that expectation
disappointed. In short, melancholy and despondence took possession of
my soul; and, repining at that providence which, by acting the
stepmother towards me, kept me from the fruition of my wishes, I
determined, in a fit of despair, to risk all I had at the gaming table,
with a view of acquiring a fortune sufficient to render me independent
for life; or of plunging myself into such a state of misery, as would
effectually crush every ambitious hope that now tortured my
imagination.

Actuated by this fatal resolution, I engaged in play, and, after some
turns of fortune found myself, at the end of three days, worth a
thousand pounds; but it was not my intention to stop there, for which
cause I kept Strap ignorant of my success, and continued my career
until I was reduced to five guineas, which I would have hazarded also,
had I not been ashamed to fall from a bet of two hundred pounds to such
a petty sum.

Having thus executed my scheme, I went home, amazed to find myself so
much at ease, and informed my friend Strap of my mischance with such
calmness, that he, imagining I joked, affected to receive the tidings
with great equanimity. But both he and I found ourselves mistaken very
soon. I had misinterpreted my own stupidity into deliberate
resignation, and he had reason to believe me in earnest when he saw me
next morning agitated with the most violent despair, which he
endeavoured to alleviate with all the consolation in his power.

In one of my lucid intervals, however, I charged him to take a place in
the stage coach for London; and, in the meantime, paid my debts in
Bath, which amounted to thirty shillings only. Without taking leave of
my friends, I embarked, Strap having the good fortune to find a return
horse, and arrived in town, without having met with anything remarkable
on the road. While we crossed Bagshot Heath, I was seized with a sort
of inclination to retrieve my fortune, by laying passengers under
contribution in some such place. My thoughts were so circumstanced at
this time, that I should have digested the crime of robbery, so
righteously had I concerted my plan, and ventured my life in the
execution, had I not been deterred by reflecting upon the infamy that
attends detection.

The apartment I formerly lived in being unengaged, I took possession of
it, and next day went in quest of Banter, who received me with open
arms, in expectation of having his bond discharged to his liking: but
when he understood what had happened, his countenance changed of a
sudden, and he told me, with a dryness of displeasure peculiar to
himself, that, if he were in my place, he would put it out of fortune’s
power to play him such another trick, and be avenged of his own
indiscretion at once. When I desired him to explain his meaning, he
pointed to his neck, raised himself on his tiptoes, and was going away
without any further ceremony, when I put him in mind of my indigence,
and demanded the five guineas I had formerly lent him. “Five guineas?”
cried he; “zounds! had you acted with common prudence, you might have
had twenty thousand in your pocket by this time. I depended upon five
hundred from you, as much as if I had had notes for it in the bank; and
by all the rules of equity, you are indebted to me for that sum.” I was
neither pleased nor convinced by this computation, and insisted on my
right with such determined obstinacy, that he was fain to alter his
ton, and appease my clamour by assuring me, that he was not master of
five shillings. Society in distress generally promotes good
understanding among people; from being a dun I descended to be a
client, and asked his advice about repairing my losses. He counselled
me to have recourse again to the gaming table, where I succeeded so
well before, and put myself in a condition by selling my watch. I
followed his directions, and, having accommodated him with a few
pieces, went to the place, where I lost every shilling.

Then I returned to my lodgings full of desperate resolution, and having
made Strap acquainted with my fate, ordered him to pawn my sword
immediately, that I might be enabled to make another effort. This
affectionate creature no sooner understood my purpose, than, seized
with insupportable sorrow at the prospect of my misery, he burst into
tears, and asked what I proposed to do after the small sum he could
raise on the sword should be spent. “On my own account” said he, “I am
quite unconcerned; for, while God spares me health and these ten
fingers, I can earn a comfortable subsistence anywhere; but what must
become of you, who have less humility to stoop, and more appetites to
gratify?” Here I interrupted him, by saying, with a gloomy aspect, I
should never want a resource while I had a loaded pistol in possession.
Stupified with horror at this dreadful insinuation, he stood mute for
some time and then broke out into “God of his infinite mercy enable you
to withstand that temptation of the devil! Consider your immortal
soul—there’s no repentance in the grave! O Lord! that we ever should
have come to this! Are we not enjoined to resign ourselves to the will
of Heaven?—where is your patience?—Durum patientia frango—you are but a
young man—there may be many good things in store for you—accidit in
puncto quo non speratur in anno—remember your uncle, Mr. Bowling;
perhaps he is now on his voyage homeward, pleasing himself with the
hopes of seeing and relieving you; nay, peradventure, he has already
arrived, for the ship was expected about this time.” A ray of hope shot
athwart my soul at this suggestion; I thanked my friend for this
seasonable recollection, and, after having promised to take no
resolution till his return, dismissed him to Wapping for intelligence.

In his absence I was visited by Banter, who, being informed of my bad
luck at play, told me that fortune would probably be one day weary of
persecuting me. “In the meantime,” said he, “here’s a letter for you,
which I received just now inclosed in one from Freeman.” I snatched it
with eagerness, and knowing the superscription to be of Narcissa’s
handwriting, kissed it with transport, and, having opened it, read:

“It is with great difficulty that I have stolen, from the observation
of those spies who are set over me, this opportunity of telling you,
that I was suddenly carried away from Bath by my brother, who was
informed of our correspondence by Lord Quiverwit whom, I since
understand, you have wounded in a duel on my account. As I am fully
convinced of your honour and love, I hope I shall never hear of such
desperate proofs of either for the future. I am so strictly watched
that it will be impossible for you to see me, until my brother’s
suspicion shall abate, or Heaven contrive some other unforeseen event
in our behalf. In the meantime, you may depend on the constancy and
affection of


“Your own
“Narcissa.


    “P. S. Miss Williams, who is my fellow prisoner, desires to be
    remembered to you. We are both in good health, and only in pain for
    you, especially as it will be impracticable for you to convey any
    message or letter to the place of our confinement; for which reason
    pray desist from the attempt, that, by miscarrying, might prolong
    our captivity.


“N—.”


This kind letter afforded me great consolation: I communicated it to
Banter, and, at the same time, showed him her picture: he approved of
her beauty and good sense, and could not help owning that my neglect of
Miss Snapper was excusable, when such a fine creature engrossed my
attention.

I began to be reconciled to my fate, and imagined, that, if I could
contrive means of subsisting until my uncle should arrive, in case he
were not already at home, he would enable me to do something effectual
in behalf of my love and fortune; I therefore consulted Banter about a
present supply, who no sooner understood that I had credit, with a
tailor, than he advised me to take off two or three suits of rich
clothes, and convert them into cash, by selling them at half-price to a
salesman in Monmouth Street. I was startled at this proposal, which I
thought savoured a little of fraud; he rendered it palatable, by
observing that, in a few months, I might be in a condition to do
everybody justice; and, in the meantime, I was acquitted by the honesty
of my intention. I suffered myself to be persuaded by his salvo, by
which my necessity, rather than my judgment, was convinced; and, when I
found there were no accounts of the ship in which my uncle embarked,
actually put the scheme in practice, and raised by it five-and-twenty
guineas, paying him for his advice with the old five.




CHAPTER LXI


I am arrested—carried to the Marshalsea—find my old Acquaintance beau
Jackson in that Jail—he informs me of his Adventures—Strap arrives, and
with difficulty is comforted—Jackson introduces me to a Poet—I admire
his Conversation and Capacity—am deeply affected with my
Misfortune—Strap hires himself as a Journeyman Barber


But this expedient was in a few weeks followed with a consequence I did
not foresee. A player, having purchased one of the suits that were
exposed to sale, appeared in it on the stage one night, while my tailor
unfortunately happened to be present. He knew it immediately, and,
inquiring minutely into the affair, discovered my whole contrivance:
upon which he came into my lodgings, and telling me that he was very
much straightened for want of money, presented his bill, which amounted
to fifty pounds. Surprised at which unexpected address, I affected to
treat him cavalierly, swore some oaths, asked if he doubted my honour,
and telling him I should take care whom I dealt with for the future,
bade him come again in three days. He obeyed me punctually, demanded
his money, and finding himself amused with bare promises, arrested me
that very day in the street. I was not much shocked at this adventure,
which, indeed, put an end to a state of horrible expectation: but I
refused to go to a sponging-house, where I heard there was nothing but
the most flagrant imposition: and, a coach being called, was carried to
the Marshalsea, attended by a bailiff and his follower, who were very
much disappointed and chagrined at my resolution.

The turnkey, guessing from my appearance that I had money in my pocket,
received me with the repetition of the Latin word depone, and gave me
to understand, that I must pay beforehand for the apartment I should
choose to dwell in. I desired to see his conveniences, and hired a
small paltry bed-chamber for a crown a week, which, in any other place,
would not have let for half the money. Having taken possession of this
dismal habitation, I sent for Strap, and my thoughts were busied in
collecting matter of consolation to that faithful squire, when somebody
knocked at my door, which I no sooner opened, than a young fellow
entered in very shabby clothes and marvellous foul linen. After a low
bow, he called me by name, and asked if I had forgotten him. His voice
assisted me in recollecting his person, whom I soon recognised to be my
old acquaintance, Jackson, of whom mention is made in the first part of
my memoirs. I saluted him cordially, expressed my satisfaction at
finding him alive, and condoled him on his present situation, which,
however, did not seem to affect him much, for he laughed very heartily
at the occasion of our meeting so unexpectedly in this place. Our
mutual compliments being past, I inquired about his amour with the lady
of fortune, which seemed to be so near a happy conclusion when I had
the pleasure of seeing him last: and, after an immoderate fit of
laughter, he gave me to understand that he had been egregiously bit in
that affair. “You must know,” said he, “that a few days after our
adventure with the bawd, and her b—ches, I found means to be married to
that same blue lady you speak of, and passed the night with her at her
lodgings, so much to her satisfaction, that early in the morning, after
a good deal of snivelling and sobbing, she owned, that, far from being
an heiress of great fortune, she was no other than a common woman of
the town, who had decoyed me into matrimony, in order to enjoy the
privilege of a femme couverte; and that, unless I made my escape
immediately, I should be arrested for a debt of her contracting, by
bailiffs employed and instructed for that purpose. Startled at this
intimation, I rose in a twinkling, and taking leave of my spouse with
several hearty damns, got safe into the verge of the court, where I
kept snug, until I was appointed surgeon’s mate of a man-of-war at
Portsmouth; for which place I set out on Sunday, went on board of my
ship, in which I sailed to the Straits, where I had the good fortune to
be made surgeon of a sloop that came home a few months after, and was
put out of commission: whereupon, I came to London, imagining myself
forgotten, and freed from my wife and her creditors, but had not been
in town a week, before I was arrested for a debt of hers, amounting to
twenty pounds, and brought to this place, where I have been fixed by
another action since that time. However, you know my disposition, I
defy care and anxiety; and being on the half-pay list, make shift to
live here tolerably easy.” I congratulated him on his philosophy, and,
remembering that I was in his debt, repaid the money he formerly lent
me, which, I believe, was far from being unseasonable. I then inquired
about the economy of the place, which he explained to my satisfaction;
and, after we had agreed to mess together, he was just now going to
give orders for dinner when Strap arrived.

I never in my life saw sorrow so extravagantly expressed in any
countenance as in that of my honest friend, which was, indeed,
particularly adapted by nature for such impressions. When we were left
by ourselves, I communicated to him my disaster, and endeavoured to
console him with the same arguments he had formerly used to me, withal
representing the fair chance I had of being relieved in a short time by
Mr. Bowling. But his grief was unutterable: he seemed to give attention
without listening, and wrung his hands in silence; so that I was in a
fair way of being infected by his behaviour, when Jackson returned,
and, perceiving the deference I paid to Strap, although in a footman’s
habit, distributed his crumbs of comfort with such mirth, jollity and
unconcern, that the features of the distressed squire relaxed by
degrees; he recovered the use of speech, and began to be a little more
reconciled to this lamentable event. We dined together on boiled beef
and greens, brought from a cook’s shop in the neighbourhood, and,
although this meal was served up in a manner little corresponding with
the sphere of life in which I had lately lived, I made a virtue of
necessity, ate with good appetite, and treated my friends with a bottle
of wine, which had the desired effect of increasing the good humour of
my fellow prisoner, and exhilarating the spirits of Strap, who now
talked cavalierly of my misfortune.

After dinner Jackson left us to our private affairs; when I desired my
friend to pack up all our things, and carry them to some cheap lodgings
he should choose for himself in the neighbourhood of the Marshalsea,
after he had discharged my lodgings, for which purpose I gave him
money. I likewise recommended to him the keeping my misfortune secret,
and saying to my landlord, or any other who should inquire for me, that
I was gone into the country for a few weeks: at the same time I laid
strong injunctions upon him to call every second day upon Banter, in
case he should receive any letter for me from Narcissa, by the channel
of Freeman; and by all means to leave a direction for himself at my
uncle’s lodgings in Wapping, by which I might be found when my kinsman
should arrive.

When he departed to execute these orders (which by the bye were
punctually performed that very night), I found myself so little
seasoned to my situation, that I dreaded reflection, and sought shelter
from it in the company of the beau, who, promising to regale me with a
lecture upon taste, conducted me to the common side, where I saw a
number of naked miserable wretches assembled together. We had not been
here many minutes, when a figure appeared, wrapped in a dirty rug, tied
about his loins with two pieces of list, of different colours, knotted
together; having a black bushy beard, and his head covered with a huge
mass of brown periwig, which seems to have been ravished from the crown
of some scarecrow. This apparition, stalking in with great solemnity,
made a profound bow to the audience, who signified their approbation by
a general response of “How d’ye do, doctor!” He then turned towards us,
and honoured Jackson with a particular salutation, upon which my
friend, in a formal manner, introduced him to me by the name of Mr.
Melopoyn. This ceremony being over, he advanced into the middle of the
congregation, which crowded around him, and hemming three times, to my
utter astonishment, pronounced with great significance of voice and
gesture, a very elegant and ingenious discourse upon the difference
between genius and taste, illustrating his assertions with apt
quotations from the best authors, ancient as well as modern. When he
had finished his harangue, which lasted a full hour, he bowed again to
the spectators; not one of whom (I was informed) understood so much as
a sentence of what he had uttered. They manifested, however, their
admiration and esteem by voluntary contributions, which Jackson told
me, one week with another, amounted to eighteen pence. This moderate
stipend, together with some small presents that he received for making
up differences and deciding causes amongst the prisoners, just enabled
him to breathe and walk about in the grotesque figure I have described.
I understood also, that he was an excellent poet, and had composed a
tragedy, which was allowed by everybody who had seen it to be a
performance of great merit: that his learning was infinite, his morals
unexceptionable, and his modesty invincible. Such a character could not
fail of attracting my regard; I longed impatiently to be acquainted
with him, and desired Jackson would engage him to spend the evening in
my apartment. My request was granted; he favoured us with his company,
and, in the course of our conversation perceiving that I had a strong
passion for the Belles Lettres, acquitted himself so well on that
subject, that I expressed a fervent desire of seeing his productions.
In this point too he gratified my inclination; he promised to bring his
tragedy to my room next day, and in the meantime, entertained me with
some detached pieces, which gave me a very advantageous idea of his
poetical talent. Among other things I was particularly pleased with
some elegies, in imitation of Tibullus; one of which I beg leave to
submit to the reader as a specimen of his complexion and capacity:—

    Where now are all my flattering dreams of joy?
Monimia, give my soul her wonted rest;—
    Since first thy beauty fixed my roving eye,
heart-gnawing cares corrode my pensive breast!

    Let happy lovers fly where pleasures call,
With festive songs beguile the fleeting hour,
    Lead beauty through the mazes of the ball,
Or press her wanton in love’s roseate bower:

    For me, no more I’ll range the empurpled mead,
Where shepherd’s pipe and virgins dance around,
    Nor wander through the woodbine’s fragrant shade,
To hear the music of the grove resound.

    I’ll seek some lonely church, or dreary hall,
Where fancy paints the glimmering taper blue,
    Where damps hang mouldering on the ivy’d wall,
And sheeted ghosts drink up the midnight dew,

    There, leagued with hopeless anguish and despair,
A while in silence o’er my fate repair:
    Then, with a long farewell to love and care,
To kindred dust my weary limbs consign.

    Wilt thou, Monimia, shed a gracious tear
On the cold grave where all my sorrows rest?
    Strew vernal flowers, applaud my love sincere,
And bid the turf lie easy on my breast?


I was wonderfully affected with this pathetic complaint, which seemed
so well calculated for my own disappointment in love, that I could not
help attaching the idea of Narcissa to the name of Monimia, and of
forming such melancholy presages of my passion, that I could not
recover my tranquillity: and was fain to have recourse to the bottle,
which prepared me for a profound sleep that I could not otherwise have
enjoyed. Whether these impressions invited and introduced a train of
other melancholy reflections, or my fortitude was all exhausted in the
effort I made against despondence, during the first day of my
imprisonment, I cannot determine; but I awoke in the horrors, and found
my imagination haunted with such dismal apparitions, that I was ready
to despair: and I believe the reader will own, I had no great cause to
congratulate myself, when I considered my situation. I was interrupted
in the midst of these gloomy apprehensions by the arrival of Strap, who
contributed not a little to the re-establishment of my peace, by
letting me know that he had hired himself as a journeyman barber; by
which means he would be able not only to save me a considerable
expense, but even make shift to lay up something for my subsistence,
after my money should be spent, in case I should not be relieved
before.




CHAPTER LXII


I read Melopoyn’s Tragedy, and conceive a vast Opinion of his Genius—he
recounts his Adventures


While we ate our breakfast together, I made him acquainted with the
character and condition of the poet, who came in with his play at that
instant, and, imagining we were engaged about business, could not be
prevailed upon to sit; but, leaving his performance, went away. My
friend’s tender heart was melted at the sight of a gentleman and
Christian (for he had a great veneration for both these epithets) in
such misery; and assented with great cheerfulness to a proposal I made
of clothing him with the our superfluities; a task with which he
charged himself, and departed immediately to perform it.

He was no sooner gone than I locked my door, and sat down to the
tragedy; which I read to the end with vast pleasure, not a little
amazed at conduct of the managers who had rejected it. The fable, in my
opinion, was well chosen and naturally conducted, the incidents
interesting, the characters beautifully contrasted, strongly marked,
and well supported; the diction poetical, spirited and correct; the
unities of the drama maintained with the most scrupulous exactness; the
opening gradual and engaging, the peripeteia surprising, and the
catastrophe affecting. In short, I judged it by the laws of Aristotle
and Horace, and could find nothing in it exceptionable but a little too
much embellishment in some few places, which objection he removed to my
satisfaction, by a quotation of Aristotle’s _Poetics_, importing, that
the least interesting parts of a poem ought to be raised and dignified
by the charms and energy of diction.

I revered his genius, and was seized with an eager curiosity to know
the particular events of a fortune so unworthy of his merit. At that
instant Strap returned with a bundle of clothes, which I sent with my
compliments to Mr. Melopoyn, as a small token of my regard, and desired
the favour of his company to dinner. He accepted my present and
invitation, and in less than half-an-hour made his appearance in a
decent dress, which altered his figure very much to his advantage. I
perceived by his countenance that his heart was big with gratitude, and
endeavoured to prevent his acknowledgments, by asking pardon for the
liberty I had taken; he made no reply, but, with an aspect full of
admiration and esteem, bowed to the ground, while the tears gushed from
his eyes. Affected with these symptoms of an ingenuous mind, I shifted
the conversation, and complimented him on his performance, which I
assured him afforded me infinite pleasure. My approbation made him
happy. Dinner being served, and Jackson arrived, I begged their
permission for Strap to sit at table with us, after having informed
them that he was a person to whom I was extremely obliged; they were
kind enough to grant that favour, and we ate together with great
harmony and satisfaction.

Our meal being ended, I expressed my wonder at the little regard Mr.
Melopoyn had met with from the world: and signified a desire of hearing
how he had been treated by the managers of the playhouses, to whom I
understood from Jackson, he had offered his tragedy without success.
“There is so little entertaining in the incidents of my life,” said he,
“that I am sure the recital will not recompense your attention; but,
since you discover an inclination to know them I understand my duty too
well to disappoint your desire.

“My father, who was a curate in the country, being by the narrowness of
his circumstances hindered from maintaining me at the university, took
the charge of my education upon himself, and laboured with such
industry and concern in the undertaking, that I had little cause to
regret the want of public masters. Being at great pains to consult my
natural bias, He discovered in me betimes an inclination for poetry;
upon which he recommended to me an intimate acquaintance with the
classics, in the cultivation of which he assisted me with a paternal
zeal and uncommon erudition. When he thought me sufficiently acquainted
with the ancients, he directed my studies to the best modern authors,
French and Italian as well as English, and laid a particular injunction
upon me make myself master of my mother tongue.

“About the age of eighteen, I grew ambitious of undertaking a work of
some consequence; and, with my father’s approbation, actually planned
the tragedy you have read; but, before I had finished four acts, that
indulgent parent died, and left my mother and me in very indigent
circumstances. A near relation, compassionating our distress, took us
into his family, where I brought my fable to a conclusion; and, soon
after that period my mother quitted this life. When my sorrow for this
melancholy event had subsided, I told my kinsman, who was a farmer,
that, having paid my last duty to my parent, I had now no attachment to
detain me in the country, and therefore was resolved to set out for
London, and offer my play to the stage, where I did not doubt of
acquiring a large share of fame as well as fortune; in which case I
should not be unmindful of my friends and benefactors. My cousin was
ravished with the prospect of my felicity, and willingly contributed
towards the expense of fitting me out for my expedition.

“Accordingly I took a place in the waggon, and arrived in town, where I
hired an apartment in a garret, willing to live as frugally as
possible, until I should know what I had to expect from the manager, to
whom I intended to offer my play. For, though I looked upon myself as
perfectly secure of a good reception, imagining that a patentee would
be as eager to receive as I to present my production, I did not know
whether or not he might be pre-engaged in favour of another author, a
circumstance that would certainly retard my success. On this
consideration, too, I determined to be speedy in my application, and
even to wait upon one of the managers the very next day. For this
purpose, I inquired my landlord if he knew where either or both of them
lived: and he, being curious to know my business, and at the same time
appearing to be a very honest friendly man (a tallow chandler), I made
him acquainted with my design, upon which he told me that I went the
wrong way to work; that I would not find such easy access to a manager
as I imagined; and that if I delivered my performance without proper
recommendation, it would be as one to a thousand if ever it would be
minded. “Take my advice,” said he, “and your business is done. One of
the patentees is a good catholic, as I am, and uses the same father who
confesses me. I will make you acquainted with this good priest, who is
an excellent scholar, and if he should approve of your play, his
recommendation will go a great way in determining Mr. Supple to bring
it on the stage.” I applauded his expedient, and was introduced to the
friar, who, having perused the tragedy, was pleased to signify his
approbation, and commended me in particular for having avoided all
reflections upon religion. He promised to use all his influence with
his son Supple in my behalf, and to inform himself that very day at
what time it was proper for me to wait upon him with the piece. He was
punctual in performing his engagement, and next morning gave me to
understand that he had mentioned my affair to the manager, and that I
had nothing more to do than to go to his house any time in the
forenoon, and make use of his name, upon which I should find immediate
admittance. I took his advice, put my performance in my bosom, and,
having received directions, went immediately to the house of Mr.
Supple, and knocked at the door, which had a wicket in the middle,
faced with a net-work of iron. Through this a servant having viewed me
for some time, demanded to know my business. I told him my business was
with Mr. Supple, and that I came from Mr. O’Varnish. He examined my
appearance once more, then went away, returned in a few minutes, and
said his master was busy, and could not be seen. Although I was a
little mortified at my disappointment, I was persuaded that my
reception was owing to Mr. Supple’s ignorance of my errand: and, that I
might meet with no more obstructions of the same kind, I desired Mr.
O’Varnish to be my introductor the next time. He complied with my
request, and obtained immediate admittance to the manager, who received
me with the utmost civility, and promised to read my play with the
first convenience. By his own appointment I called again in a
fortnight, but he was gone out: I returned in a week after, and the
poor gentleman was extremely ill: I renewed my visit in a fortnight
after that, and he assured me he had been so much fatigued with
business, that he had not been able as yet to read it to an end, but he
would take the first opportunity: and, in the meantime, observed that
what he had yet seen of it was very entertaining. I comforted myself
with this declaration a few weeks longer, at the end of which I
appeared again before his wicket, was let in, and found him laid up
with the gout. I no sooner entered his chamber than, looking at me with
a languishing eye, he said, “Mr. Melopoyn, I’m heartily sorry for an
accident that has happened during my illness. You must know that my
eldest boy, finding your manuscript upon the table in the dining-room,
where I used to read it, carried it into the kitchen, and leaving it
there, a negligent wench of a cook-maid, mistaking it for waste paper,
has expended it but a few leaves in singing fowls upon the spit. But I
hope the misfortune is not irreparable, since, no doubt, you have
several copies.”

“I protest to you, my good friend, Mr. Random, I was extremely shocked
at this information; but the good-natured gentleman seemed to be so
much affected with my misfortune, that I suppressed my concern, and
told him that, although I had not another copy, I should be able to
retrieve the loss by writing another from my memory, which was very
tenacious. You cannot imagine how well pleased Mr. Supple was at this
assurance; he begged I would set about it immediately, and carefully
revolve and recollect every circumstance before I pretended to commit
it to paper, that it might be the same individual play that he had
perused. Encouraged by this injunction, which plainly demonstrated how
much he interested himself in the affair, I tasked my remembrance and
industry, and in three weeks produced the exact image of the former,
which was conveyed to him by my good friend Father O’Varnish, who told
me next day, that Mr. Supple would revise it superficially, in order to
judge of its sameness with the other, and then give his final answer.
For this examination I allotted a week: and, in full confidence of
seeing it acted in a little while, demanded an audience of the manager,
when that term was expired. But, alas! the season had slipped away
insensibly. He convinced me, that if my play had been put into
rehearsal at the time, it could not have been ready for performing
until the end of March, when the benefit nights came on; consequently,
it would have interfered with the interest of the players, whom it was
not my business to disoblige.

“I was fain to acquiesce in these reasons, which, to be sure, were
extremely just; and to reserve my performance for the next season, when
he hoped I would not be so unlucky. Although it was a grievous
disappointment to me, who, by this time, began to want both money and
necessaries; having on the strength of my expectation from the theatre,
launched out into some extravagances, by which the sum I brought to
town was already almost consumed. Indeed, I ought to be ashamed at this
circumstance of my conduct; for my finances were sufficient, with good
economy, to have maintained me comfortably a whole year. You will
perhaps be amazed when I tell you that, in six months, I expended not a
farthing less than ten guineas: but, when one considers the temptations
to which a young man is exposed in this great city, especially if he be
addicted to pleasure, as I am, the wonder will vanish, or at least
abate. Nor was the cause of my concern limited to my own situation
entirely: I had written an account of my good reception to my kinsman
the farmer, and desired him to depend upon me for the money he had
kindly accommodated me with about the end of February, which promise I
now found myself unable to perform. However, there was no remedy but
patience: I applied to my landlord, who was a very good-natured man,
candidly owned my distress, and begged his advice in laying down some
plan for my subsistence; he readily promised to consult his confessor
on this subject, and, in the meantime, told me, I was welcome to lodge
and board with him until fortune should put it in my power to make
restitution.

“Mr. O’Varnish, being informed of my necessity, offered to introduce me
to the author of a weekly paper, who, he did not doubt, would employ me
in that way, provided he should find me duly qualified; but, upon
inquiry, I understood that this journal was calculated to foment
divisions in the commonwealth, and therefore I desired to be excused
from engaging in it. He then proposed that I should write something in
the poetical way, which I might dispose of to a bookseller for a pretty
sum of ready money, and, perhaps, establish my own character into the
bargain. This event would infallibly procure friends, and my tragedy
would appear next season to the best advantage, by being supported both
by interest and reputation. I was charmed with this prospect, and
having heard what friends Mr. Pope acquired by his pastorals, set about
a work of that kind, and in less than six weeks composed as many
eclogues, which I forthwith offered to an eminent bookseller, who
desired me to leave them for his perusal, and he would give an answer
in two days. At the end of that time, I went to him, when he returned
the poems, telling me, they would not answer his purpose, and sweetened
his refusal by saying there were some good clever lines in them. Not a
little dejected at this rebuff, which, I learned from Mr. O’Varnish,
was owing to the opinion of another author whom this bookseller always
consulted on these occasions, I applied to another person of the same
profession, who told me the town was cloyed with pastorals, and advised
me, if I intended to profit by my talents, to write something satirical
or luscious, such as the Button Hole, Shockey and Towner, The Leaky
Vessel, etc, and yet this was a man in years, who wore a reverend
periwig, looked like a senator, and went regularly to church. Be that
as it will, I scorned to prostitute my pen in the manner proposed, and
carried my papers to a third, who assured me that poetry was entirely
out of his way; and asked me if I had got never a piece of secret
history, thrown into a series of letters, or a volume of adventures,
such as those of Robinson Crusoe, and Colonel Jack, or a collection of
Conundrums, wherewith to entertain the plantations. Being quite
unfurnished for this dealer, I had recourse to another with as little
success; and I verily believe, was rejected by the whole trade.

“I was afterwards persuaded to offer myself as a translator, and
accordingly repaired to a person who was said to entertain numbers of
that class in his pay; he assured me, he had already a great deal of
that work on his hands, which he did not know what to do with; observed
that translations were a mere drug, that branch of literature being
overstocked with an inundation of authors from North Britain; and asked
what I would expect per sheet for rendering the Latin classics into
English. That I might not make myself too cheap, I determined to set a
high price upon my qualifications, and demanded half-a-guinea for every
translated sheet. “Half-a-guinea!” cried he, staring at me; then paused
a little, and said, he had no occasion for my service at present. I
found my error, and, resolving to make amends, fell one-half in my
demand; upon which he stared at me and told me his hands were full. I
attempted others without finding employment, and was actually reduced
to a very uncomfortable prospect, when I bethought myself of offering
my talents to the printers of half-penny ballads and other such
occasional essays, as are hawked about the streets. With this in view I
applied to one of the most noted and vociferous of this tribe, who
directed me to a person whom I found entertaining a whole crowd of them
with gin, bread, and cheese; he carried me into a little back parlour,
very neatly furnished, where I signified my desire of being enrolled
among his writers; and was asked what kind of composition I professed.
Understanding that my inclination leaned towards poetry, he expressed
his satisfaction, telling me one of his poets had lost his senses, and
was confined in Bedlam, and the other was become dozed with drinking
drams; so that he had not done anything tolerable these many weeks.
When I proposed that we should enter into terms of agreement, he gave
me to understand that his bargains were always conditional, and his
authors paid in proportion to the sale of their works.

“Having therefore settled these conditions, which (I do assure you)
were not very advantageous to me, he assigned me a subject for a
ballad, which was to be finished in two hours; and I retired to my
garret in order to perform his injunction. As the theme happened to
suit my fancy, I completed a pretty sort of an ode within the time
prescribed, and brought it to him, big with hope of profit and
applause. He read it in a twinkling, and, to my utter astonishment,
told me it would not do; though indeed he owned I wrote a good hand,
and spelled very well, but my language was too high flown, and of
consequence not at all adapted to the capacity and taste of his
customers. I promised to rectify that mistake and in half an hour
humbled my style to the comprehension of vulgar readers; he approved of
the alteration, and gave me some hopes of succeeding in time, though he
observed that my performance was very deficient in the quaintness of
expression that pleases the multitude: however, to encourage me, he
ventured the expense of printing and paper, and, if I remember aright,
my share of the sale amounted to fourpence halfpenny.

“From that day I studied the Grub Street manner with great diligence,
and at length became such a proficient that my works were in great
request among the most polite of the chairmen, draymen,
hackney-coachmen, footmen, and servant maids: nay, I have enjoyed the
pleasure of seeing my productions adorned with cuts, pasted upon the
walls as ornaments in beer cellars and cobblers’ stalls; and have
actually heard them sung in clubs of substantial tradesmen—but empty
praise (you know, my dear friend) will not supply the cravings of
nature. I found myself in danger of starving in the midst of all my
fame; for of ten songs I composed, it was well if two had the good
fortune to please. For this reason I turned my thoughts to prose, and,
during a tract of gloomy weather, published an apparition, on the
substance of which I subsisted very comfortably a whole month; I have
made many a good meal upon a monster; a rape has often afforded me
great satisfaction; but a murder, well timed, was my never-failing
resource. What then? I was almost a slave to my employers, who expected
to be furnished at a minute’s warning with prose and verse, just as
they thought the circumstances of the times required, whether the
inclination was absent or present. Upon my sincerity, Mr. Random, I
have been so much pestered and besieged by those children of clamour,
that life became a burden to me.”




CHAPTER LXIII


The Continuation and Conclusion of Mr. Melopoyn’s Story


‘I made shift, notwithstanding, to maintain myself till the beginning
of next winter, when I renewed my addresses to my friend Mr. Supple,
and was most graciously received. “I have been thinking of your affair,
Mr. Melopoyn,” said he, “and am determined to show how far I have your
interest at heart, by introducing you to a young nobleman of my
acquaintance, who is remarkable for his fine taste in dramatic
writings, and is besides a man of such influence that, if once he
should approve of your play, his patronage will support it against all
the efforts of envy and ignorance; for, I do assure you, that merit
alone will not bring success. I have already spoken of your performance
to Lord Rattle, and if you will call at my house in a day or two, you
shall have a letter of introduction to his lordship.” I was sensibly
touched with this mark of Mr. Supple’s friendship; and looking upon my
affair as already done, went home and imparted my good fortune to my
landlord, who, to render my appearance more acceptable to my patron,
procured a suit of new clothes for me on his own credit.

“Not to trouble you with idle particulars, I carried my tragedy to his
lordship’s lodgings, and sent it up along with Mr. Supple’s letter by
one of his servants, who desired me, by his lord’s order, to return in
a week. I did so, and was admitted to his lordship, who received me
very courteously, told me he had perused my play, which he thought, on
the whole, was the best coup d’essai he had ever seen; but that he had
marked some places in the margin, which he imagined might be altered
for the better. I was transported with this reception, and promised
(with many acknowledgments of his lordship’s generosity) to be governed
solely by his advice and direction.”

“Well, then,” said he, “write another fair copy with the alterations I
have proposed, and bring it to me as soon as possible; for I am
resolved to have it brought on the stage this winter.” You may be sure
I set about this task with alacrity; and although I found his
lordship’s remarks much more numerous and of less importance than I
expected, I thought it was not my interest to dispute upon trifles with
my patron; therefore new modelled it according to his desire in less
than a month.

“When I waited upon him with the manuscript, I found one of the actors
at breakfast with his lordship, who immediately introduced him to my
acquaintance, and desired him to read a scene of my play. This task he
performed very much to my satisfaction, with regard to emphasis and
pronunciation; but he signified his disgust at several words in every
page, which I presuming to defend, Lord Rattle told me, with a
peremptory look, I must not pretend to dispute with him, who had been a
player these twenty years, and understood the economy of the stage
better than any man living. I was forced to submit; and his lordship
proposed the same actor should read the whole play in the evening,
before some gentlemen of his acquaintance, whom he would convene to his
lodgings for that purpose.

“I was present at the reading; and I protest to you, my dear friend, I
never underwent such a severe trial in the whole course of my life at
that juncture; for although the player might be a very honest man and a
good performer, he was excessively illiterate and assuming, and made a
thousand frivolous objections, which I was not permitted to answer.
However, the piece was very much applauded on the whole; the gentlemen
present, who, I understood, were men of fortune, promised to
countenance and support it as much as they could; and Lord Rattle,
assuring me that he would act the part of a careful nurse to it,
desired me to carry it home, and alter it immediately according to
their remarks. I was fain to acquiesce in his determination, and
fulfilled his injunctions with all the expedition in my power; but,
before I could present the new copy, my good friend Mr. Supple had
disposed of his property and patent to one Mr. Brayer; so that fresh
interest was to be made with the new manager. This task Lord Rattle
undertook, having some acquaintance with him, and recommended my
performance so strongly that it was received.

“I looked upon myself now as upon the eve of reaping the fruits of all
my labour. I waited a few days in expectation of its being put in
rehearsal, and wondering at the delay, applied to my worthy patron, who
excused Mr. Brayer on account of the multiplicity of business in which
he was involved, and bade me beware of teasing the patentee. I
treasured up this caution, and exerted my particular three weeks
longer; at the end of which his lordship gave me to understand that Mr.
Brayer had read my play, and owned it had indubitable merit; but, as he
had long been pre-engaged to another author, he could not possibly
represent it that season; though, if I would reserve it for the next,
and in the interim make such alterations as he had proposed by
observations on the margin, I might depend upon his compliance.

“Thunderstruck at this disappointment, I could not, for some minutes,
utter one syllable. At length, however, I complained bitterly of the
manager’s insincerity in amusing me so long, when he knew from the
beginning that he could not gratify my desire. But his lordship
reprimanded me for my freedom, said Mr. Brayer was a man of honour, and
imputed his behaviour with respect to me nothing else but
forgetfulness. And indeed I have had some reason, since that time, to
be convinced of his bad memory; for, in spite of appearances, I will
not allow myself to interpret his conduct in any other way. Lord Rattle
observing me very much affected with my disappointment, offered his
interest to bring on my play at the other house, which I eagerly
accepting, he forthwith wrote a letter of recommendation to Mr.
Bellower, actor and prime minister to Mr. Vandal, proprietor of that
theatre, and desired me to deliver it with my tragedy, without loss of
time. Accordingly, I hastened to his house, where after having waited a
whole hour in the lobby, I was admitted to his presence, and my
performance received with great state. He told me he was extremely busy
at present, but he would peruse it as soon as possible, and bade me to
call again in a week. I took my leave, not a little astonished at the
pert and supercilious behaviour of this stage player, who had not
treated me with good manners; and began to think the dignity of a poet
greatly impaired since the days of Euripides and Sophocles; but all
this was nothing in comparison of what I have since observed.

“Well, Mr. Random, I went back at the appointed time, and was told that
Mr. Bellower was engaged, and could not see me, I repeated my visit a
few days after, and having waited a considerable time was favoured with
an audience, during which, he said, he had not as yet read my play.
Nettled at this usage, I could contain myself no longer, but, telling
him, I imagined he would have paid more deference to Lord Rattle’s
recommendation, demanded my manuscript with some expression of
resentment. “Ay,” said he in a theatrical tone, “with all my heart.”
Then pulling out the drawer of the bureau at which he sat, he took out
a bundle, and threw it upon a table that was near him, pronouncing the
word, “There!” with great disdain. I took it up, and perceiving with
some surprise, that it was a comedy, told him it did not belong to me;
upon which he offered another which I also disclaimed. A third was
produced, and rejected for the same reason. At length he pulled out a
whole bundle, and spread them before me, saying, “There are seven—take
which you please—or take them all.” I singled out my own, and went
away, struck dumb with admiration at what I had seen—not so much on
account of his insolence, as of the number of new plays which from this
circumstance I concluded were yearly offered to the stage. You may be
sure, I did not fail to carry my complaint to my patron, who did not
receive it with all the indignation I expected; but taxed me with
precipitation, and told me I must lay my account with bearing with the
humours of the players, if I intended to write for the stage. “There is
now no other remedy,” he said, “but to keep it till the next season for
Mr. Brayer, and alter it at your leisure, in the summer, according to
his directions.” I was now reduced to a terrible alternative, either to
quit all hopes of my tragedy, from which I had all along promised
myself a large share of fortune and reputation, or to encounter eight
long months of adversity in preparing for and expecting its appearance.
This last penance, painful as it was, seemed most eligible to my
reflection at that time, and therefore I resolved to undergo it.

“Why should I tire you with particulars of my consequence? I wrestled
with extreme poverty until the time of my probation was expired; and
went to my Lord Rattle in order to remind him of my affair, when I
understood, to my great concern, that his lordship was just on the
point of going abroad, and which was still more unfortunate for me, Mr.
Brayer had gone into the country; so that my generous patron had it not
in his power to introduce me personally, as he intended: however, he
wrote a very strong letter to the manager in my favour, and put him in
mind of the promise he had made in behalf of my play.

“As soon as I was certified of Brayer’s return, I went to his house
with this letter, but was told he was gone out. I called again next day
early in the morning, received the same answer, and was desired to
leave my name and business: I did so, and returned the day after, when
the servant still affirmed that his master was gone abroad; though I
perceived him, as I retired, observing me through a window. Incensed at
this discovery, I went to a coffee-house hard by, and, inclosing his
lordship’s letter in one from myself, demanded a categorical answer. I
sent it to his house by a porter, who returned in a few minutes, and
told me Mr. Brayer would be glad to see me at that instant. I obeyed
the summons, and was received with such profusion of compliments and
apologies, that my resentment immediately subsided, and I was even in
pain for the concern which this holiest man showed at the mistake of
his servant, who, it seems, had been ordered to deny him to everybody
but me. He expressed the utmost veneration for his good and noble
friend, Lord Rattle, whom he should always be proud to serve; promised
to peruse the play with all dispatch, and give me a meeting upon it:
and, as a testimony of his esteem, made me a present of a general order
for the season, by which I should be admitted to any part of the
theatre. This was a very agreeable compliment to me, whose greatest
pleasure consisted in seeing dramatic performances, and you need not
doubt that I often availed myself of my privilege. As I had an
opportunity of being behind the scenes when I pleased, I frequently
conversed with Mr. Brayer about my play, and asked when he meant to put
it into rehearsal; but he had always so much business upon his hands,
that it remained with him unopened a considerable while; and I became
very uneasy about the season, that wasted apace, when I saw in the
papers another new play advertised, which had been written, offered,
accepted, and rehearsed, in the compass of three months. You may easily
guess how much I was confounded at this event! I own to you that, in
the first transports of my anger, I suspected Mr. Brayer of having
acted towards me in the most pitiful perfidious manner; and was
actually glad at his disappointment in the success of his favourite
piece, which, by the strength of art, lingered till the third night,
and then died in a deplorable manner. But now that passion has no share
in my reflection, I am willing to ascribe his behaviour to his want of
memory or want of judgment, which, you know, are natural defects, that
are more worthy of compassion than reproach.

“About this time I happened to be in company with a gentlewoman, who,
having heard of my tragedy, told me, she was well acquainted with the
wife of a gentleman who was very well known to a lady, who had great
interest with a person who was intimate with Earl Sheerwit: and that,
if I pleased, she would use her influence in my behalf. As this
nobleman had the character of a Maecenas in the nation, and could stamp
a value upon any work by his sole countenance and approbation, I
accepted her offer with eagerness, in full confidence of seeing my
reputation established, and my wishes fulfilled in a very short time,
provided that I should have the good fortune to please his lordship’s
taste. I withdrew the manuscript from the hands of Mr. Brayer, and
committed it to the care of this gentlewoman, who laboured so
effectually in my interest, that in less than a month it was conveyed
to the earl, and in a few weeks after, I had the satisfaction to hear
that he had read and approved it very much. Transported with this piece
of intelligence, I flattered myself with the hopes of his interesting
himself in its favour, but, hearing no more of this matter in three
whole months, I began (God forgive me!) to suspect the veracity of the
person who brought me the good tidings; for I thought it impossible
that a man of his rank and character, who knew the difficulty of
writing a good tragedy, and understood the dignity of the work, should
read and applaud an essay of this kind, without feeling an inclination
to befriend the author, whom his countenance alone could raise above
dependence. But it was not long before I found my friend very much
wronged by my opinion.

“You must know, that the civilities I had received from Lord Rattle,
and the desire he manifested to promote the success of my play,
encouraged me to write an account of my bad fortune to his lordship,
who condescended so far as to desire, by letter, a young squire of a
great estate, with whom he was intimate, to espouse my cause, and, in
particular, make me acquainted with one Mr. Marmozet, a celebrated
player, who had lately appeared on the stage with astonishing eclat,
and bore such sway in the house where he acted, that the managers durst
not refuse anything he recommended. The young gentleman, whom Lord
Rattle had employed for this purpose, being diffident of his own
interest with Mr. Marmozet, had recourse to a nobleman of his
acquaintance, who, at his solicitation, was so good as to introduce me
to him; and the conversation turning upon my performance, I was not a
little surprised, as well as pleased, to hear that Earl Sheerwit had
spoken very much in its praise, and even sent Mr. Marmozet the copy,
with a message, expressing a desire that he would act in it next
season. Nor was this favourite actor backward in commending the piece,
which he mentioned with such expressions of regard, that I do not
choose to repeat: assuring me that he would appear in it, provided he
should be engaged to play at all during the ensuing season. In the
meantime, he desired I would give him leave to peruse it in the
country, whither he intended to remove next day, that he might have
leisure to consider and point out such alterations as might, perhaps,
be necessary for its representation; and took my direction, that he
might communicate by letter the observations he should make. Trusting
to these assurances, and the interest which had been made in my behalf,
I hugged myself in the expectation of seeing it not only acted, but
acted to the greatest advantage, and this I thought could not fail of
recompensing me in ample manner for the anxiety and affliction I had
undergone; but six weeks being elapsed, I did not know how to reconcile
Mr. Marmozet’s silence with his promise of writing to me in ten days
after he set out for the country; however, I was at last favoured with
a letter, importing that he had made some remarks on my tragedy, which
he would freely impart at meeting, and advised me to put it, without
loss of time, into the hands of that manager, who had the best company;
as he himself was quite uncertain whether or not he should be engaged
that winter. I was a good deal alarmed at this last part of his letter,
and advised about it with a friend, who told me, it was a plain
indication of Mr. Marmozet’s desire to get rid of his promise; that his
pretended uncertainty about acting next winter was no other than a
scandalous evasion; for, to his certain knowledge, he was already
engaged, or at least in terms, with Mr. Vandal; and that his design was
to disappoint me, in favour of a new comedy, which he had purchased of
the author, and intended to bring upon the stage for his own advantage.

“In short, my dear sir, this person, who, I must own, is if a sanguine
complexion, handled the moral character of Mr. Marmozet with such
severity, that I began to suspect him of some particular prejudice, and
put myself upon my guard against his insinuations. I ought to crave
pardon for this tedious narration of trivial circumstances, which,
however interesting they may be to me, must certainly be very dry and
insipid to the ear of one unconcerned in the affair. But I understand
the meaning of your looks, and will proceed.

“Well, sir, Mr. Marmozet, upon his return to town, treated me with
uncommon complaisance, and invited me to his lodgings, where he
proposed to communicate his remarks, which, I confess, were more
unfavourable than I expected; but I answered his objections, and, as I
thought, brought him over to my opinion; for, on the whole, he
signified the highest approbation of the performance. In the course of
our dispute, I was not a little surprised to find this poor gentleman’s
memory so treacherous, as to let him forget what he had said to me,
before he went out of town, in regard to Earl Sheerwit’s opinion of my
play, which he now professed himself ignorant of; and I was extremely
mortified at hearing from his own mouth, that his interest with Mr.
Vandal was so very low as to be insufficient of itself to bring a new
piece upon the stage. I then begged his advice, and he counselled me to
apply to Earl Sheerwit, for a message in my favour to the manager, who
would not presume to refuse anything recommended by so great man; and
he was so kind as to promise to second this message with all his power.
I had immediate recourse to the worthy gentlewoman my friend, already
mentioned, who opened the channels of her conveyance with such
expedition, that in a few days I had a promise of the message, provided
I could assure myself of Mr. Vandal’s being unengaged to any other
writer; for his lordship did not choose to condescend so far, until he
should understand that there was a probability (at least) of
succeeding; at the same time that blessed me with this piece of news, I
was startled at another, by the same channel of communication; which
was, that Mr. Marmozet, before he advised me to this application, had
informed the earl that he had read my play, and found it altogether
unfit for the stage. Though I could not doubt the certainty of this
intelligence, I believed there was some inapprehension in the case;
and, without taking any notice of it, told Mr. Marmozet the answer I
had been favoured with; and he promised to ask Mr. Vandal the question
proposed. I waited upon him in a day or two, when he gave me to
understand, that Mr. Vandal having professed himself free of all
engagements, he had put my play into his hands, and represented it as a
piece strongly recommended by Earl Sheerwit, who (he assured him) would
honour him with a message in its favour; and he desired me to call for
an answer at Mr. Vandal’s house in three days. I followed his
directions, and found the manager, who being made acquainted with my
business, owned that Mr. Marmozet had given him a manuscript play, but
denied that he had mentioned Earl Sheerwit’s name. When I informed him
of the circumstances of the affair, he said, he had no engagement with
any author; that he would read my tragedy forthwith; and did not
believe he should venture to reject it in contradiction to his
lordship’s opinion, for which he had the utmost veneration, but put it
into rehearsal without loss of time. I was so much intoxicated with
this encouragement, that I overlooked the mysterious conduct of Mr.
Marmozet, and attended the manager at the time appointed, when, to my
infinite confusion, he pronounced my play improper for the stage, and
rejected it accordingly. As soon as I could recollect myself from the
disorder into which this unexpected refusal had thrown me, I expressed
a desire of hearing his objections, which were so groundless,
indistinct, and unintelligible, that I persuaded myself he had not at
all perused the piece, but had been prompted by somebody whose lessons
he had not rightly retained. However, I have been since informed that
the poor man’s head, which was not naturally very clear, had been
disordered with superstition, and that he laboured under the tyranny of
a wife, and the terrors of hellfire at the same time.

“Precipitated in this manner from the highest pinnacle of hope to the
abyss of despondence, I was ready to sink under the burden of my
affliction, and, in the bitterness of my anguish, could not help
entertaining some doubts of Mr. Marmozet’s integrity, when I
recollected and compared the circumstances of his conduct towards me. I
was encouraged in this suspicion by being told that my Lord Sheerwit
had spoken of his character with great contempt: and, in particular,
resented his insolence in opposing his own taste to that of his
lordship, concerning my tragedy. While I hesitated between different
opinions of the matter, that friend, who (as I told you before) was a
little hot-headed, favoured me with a visit, and, having heard a
circumstantial account of the whole affair, could not contain his
indignation, but affirmed without ceremony that Mr. Marmozet was the
sole occasion of my disappointment; that he acted from first to last
with the most perfidious dissimulation, cajoling me with insinuating
civilities, while he underhand employed all his art and influence to
prejudice the ignorant manager against my performance; that nothing
could equal his hypocrisy but his avarice, which engrossed the
faculties of his soul so much, that he scrupled not to be guilty of the
meanest practices to gratify that sordid appetite; that, in consequence
of this disposition, he had prostituted his honour in betraying my
inexperience, and in undermining the interest of another author of
established reputation, who had also offered a tragedy to the stage,
which he thought would interfere with the success of the comedy he had
bought, and determined to bring on at all events.

“I was shocked at the description of such a monster, which I could not
believe existed in the world, bad as it is, and argued against the
asseverations of my friend, by demonstrating the bad policy of such
behaviour, which could not fail of entailing infamy upon the author;
and the small temptation that a man of Mr. Marmozet’s figure and
success could have to consult his interest in such a grovelling manner,
which must create contempt and abhorrence of him in his patrons, and
effectually deprive him of the countenance and protection he now enjoys
in such an eminent degree. He pretended to laugh at my simplicity, and
asked, if I knew for which of his virtues he was so much caressed by
the people of fashion. “It is not,” said he, “for the qualities of his
heart, that this little parasite is invited to the tables of dukes and
lords, who hire extraordinary cooks for his entertainment. His avarice
they see not, his ingratitude they feel not, his hypocrisy accommodates
itself to their humours, and is of consequence pleasing; but he is
chiefly courted for his buffoonery, and will be admitted into the
choicest parties of quality for his talent of mimicking Punch and his
wife Joan, when a poet of the most excellent genius is not able to
attract the least regard.” God forbid, Mr. Random, that I should credit
assertions that degrade the dignity of our superiors so much, and
represent the poor man as the most abject of all beings! No, I looked
upon them as the hyperboles of passion; and though that comedy of which
he spoke did actually appear, I dare not doubt the innocence of Mr.
Marmozet, who, I am told, is as much as ever in favour with the earl; a
circumstance that, surely, could not be, unless he had vindicated his
character to the satisfaction of his lordship. Pray forgive this long
digression, and give me the hearing a little longer; for, thank heaven!
I am now near the goal.

“Baffled in all my attempts, I despaired of seeing my play acted; and
bethought myself of choosing some employment that might afford a sure,
though mean subsistence; but my landlord, to whom I was by this time
considerably indebted, and who had laid his account with having his
money paid all in a heap from the profits of my third night, could not
brook his disappointment, therefore made another effort in my behalf,
and, by dint of interest, procured a message from a lady of fashion to
Mr. Brayer, who had always professed a great veneration for her,
desiring that he would set up my play forthwith, and assuring him that
she and all her friends would support it in the performance. To
strengthen my interest, she engaged his best actors in my cause; and,
in short, exerted herself so much, that it was again received, and my
hopes began to revive. But Mr. Brayer, honest man, was so much
engrossed by business of vast consequence, though to appearance he had
nothing at all to do, that he could not find time to read it until the
season was pretty far advanced; and read it he must, for
notwithstanding his having perused it before, his memory did not retain
one circumstance of the matter.

“At length he favoured it with his attention, and having proposed
certain alterations, sent his duty to the lady who patronised it, and
promised, on his honour, to bring it on next winter, provided these
alterations should be made, and the copy delivered to him before the
end of April. With an aching heart, I submitted to these conditions,
and performed them accordingly: but fortune owed me another unforeseen
mortification; Mr. Marmozet, during the summer, became joint patentee
with Mr. Brayer, so that when I claimed performance of articles, I was
told he could do nothing without the consent of his partner, who was
pre-engaged to another author.

“My condition was rendered desperate by the death of my good friend and
landlord, whose executors obtained a judgment against my effects, which
they seized, turned me out into the streets naked, friendless, and
forlorn: there I was arrested at the suit of my tailor, and thrown into
the prison, where I have made shift to live these five weeks on the
bounty of my fellow prisoners, who, I hope, are not the worse for the
instruction and good offices by which I manifest my gratitude; but in
spite of all their charitable endeavours, my life was scarce tolerable,
until your uncommon benevolence enabled me to enjoy it with comfort.”




CHAPTER LXIV


I am seized with a deep Melancholy, and become a Sloven—am relieved by
my Uncle—he prevails upon me to engage with his Owners, as a Surgeon of
the Ship which he commands—he makes me a considerable Present—entertain
Strap as his steward—I take leave of my Friends, and go on Board—the
Ship arrives in the Downs


I shall not make any reflection on this story, in the course of which
the reader must perceive how egregiously the simplicity and milky
disposition of this worthy man had been duped and abused by a set of
scoundrels, who were so habituated to falsehood and equivocation, that
I verily believed they would have found the utmost difficulty in
uttering one syllable of truth, though their lives had depended upon
their sincerity. Notwithstanding all I had suffered from the knavery
and selfishness of mankind, I was amazed and incensed by the base
indifference which suffered such uncommon merit as he possessed to
languish in obscurity, and struggle with all the miseries of a
loathsome gaol; and should have blessed the occasion that secluded me
from such a perfidious world, had not the remembrance of my amiable
Narcissa preserved my attachment to a society of which she constituted
a part. The picture of that lovely creature was the constant companion
of my solitude. How often did I contemplate the resemblance of those
enchanting features that first captivated my heart! how often did I
weep over those endearing scenes which her image recalled! and how
often did I curse my perfidious fate for having robbed me of the fair
original! In vain did my imagination flatter me with schemes of future
happiness: surly reason always interposed, and in a moment overthrew
the unsubstantial fabric, by chastising the extravagance of my hope,
and representing my unhappy situation in the right point of view. In
vain did I fly for refuge to the amusements of the place, and engage in
the parties of Jackson at cards, billiards, nine-pins, and fives; a
train of melancholy thoughts took possession of my soul, which even the
conversation of Melopoyn could not divert. I ordered Strap to inquire
every day at Banter’s lodgings, in expectation of hearing again from my
charmer; and my disappointment considerably, augmented my chagrin. My
affectionate valet was infected with my sorrow, and often sat with me
whole hours without speaking, uttering sigh for sigh, and shedding tear
for tear. This fellowship increased our distemper; he became incapable
of business, and was discarded by his master; while I, seeing my money
melt away without any certainty of deliverance, and, in short, all my
hopes frustrated, grew negligent of life, lost all appetite, and
degenerated into such a sloven that during the space of three months I
was neither washed, shifted, nor shaved; so that my face, rendered
meagre with abstinence, was obscured with dirt, and overshadowed with
hair, and my whole appearance squalid and even frightful; when, one
day, Strap brought me notice, that there was a man below who wanted to
speak with me. Roused at this intelligence, and in full hopes of
receiving a letter from the dear object of my love, I ran downstairs
with the utmost precipitation. And found to my infinite surprise my
generous uncle, Mr. Bowling! Transported at the sight, I sprang forward
to embrace him. Upon which he started aside with great agility, drew
his hanger, and put himself upon his guard, crying, “Avast, brother,
avast! Sheer off. Yo ho! you turnkey, why don’t you keep a better look
out? Here’s one of your crazy prisoners broke from his lashings, I
suppose.” I could not help laughing heartily at his mistake; but this I
soon rectified by my voice, which he instantly recollected, and shook
me by the hand with great affection, testifying his concern at seeing
me in such a miserable condition.

I conducted him to my apartment, where, in presence of Strap, whom I
introduced to him as one of my best friends, he gave me to understand,
that he was just arrived from the Coast Of Guinea, after having made a
pretty successful voyage, in which he had acted as mate, until the ship
was attacked by a French privateer, that the captain being killed
during the engagement, he had taken the command, and was so fortunate
as to sink the enemy; after which exploit he fell in with a merchant
ship from Martinico, laden with sugar, indigo and some silver and by
virtue of his letter of marque, attacked, took, and carried her safe
into Kinsale in Ireland, where she was condemned as a lawful prize; by
which means he had not only got a pretty sum of money, but also
acquired the favour of his owners, who had already conferred upon him
the command of a large ship, mounted with twenty nine-pounders, ready
to sail upon a very advantageous voyage, which he was not at liberty to
discover. And he assured me that it was with the greatest difficulty he
found me, in consequence of a direction left for him at his lodgings at
Wapping.

I was rejoiced beyond measure at this account of his good fortune; and,
at his desire, recounted all the adventures that had happened to me
since we parted. When he understood the particulars of Strap’s
attachment to me, he squeezed his hand very cordially, and promised to
make a man of him; then, giving me ten guineas for my present occasion,
took a direction for the tailor who arrested me, and went away in order
to discharge the debt, telling me at parting, that he would soon fetch
up all my leeway with a wet sail.

I was utterly confounded at this sudden transition, which affected me
more than any reverse I had formerly felt; and a crowd of incoherent
ideas rushed so impetuously upon my imagination, that my reason could
neither separate nor connect them; when Strap, whose joy had manifested
itself in a thousand fool-cries, came into my room with his shaving
utensils, and without any previous intimation, began to lather my
beard, whistling with great emotion all the while. I started from my
reverie, and, being too well acquainted with Strap to trust myself in
his hands while he was under such agitation, desired to be excused,
sent for another barber, and suffered myself to be trimmed. Having
performed the ceremony of ablution, I shifted, and dressing in my
gayest apparel, waited for the return of my uncle, who was agreeably
surprised at my sudden transformation.

This beneficent kinsman had satisfied my creditor, and obtained an
order for my discharge, so that I was no longer a prisoner; but, as I
had some reluctance to part with my friends and fellows in distress, I
prevailed upon Mr. Bowling to favour us with his company, and invited
Mr. Melopoyn and Jackson to spend the evening at my apartment, where I
regaled them with a supper, good wine, and the news of my release, on
which they heartily congratulated me, notwithstanding the loss of my
company, which, they were pleased to say, they should severely feel. As
for Jackson, his misfortune made so little impression on himself, and
he was altogether so loose, indifferent, and indiscreet, that I could
scarce pity his situation: but I had conceived a veneration and
friendship for the poet, who was, in all respects, an object much more
worthy of compassion and regard. When our guests withdrew, and my uncle
had retired, with an intention of visiting me next morning, I made up a
bundle of some linen and other necessaries; and, bidding Strap carry
them to Mr. Melopoyn’s lodgings, went thither myself, and pressed it
upon his acceptance, with five guineas, which, with much difficulty, he
received, assuring me at the same time, that he should never have it in
his power to make satisfaction. I then asked if I could serve him in
any other way; to which he answered, “You have already done too much;”
and, unable to contain the emotions of his soul any longer, burst into
tears, and wept aloud. Moved at this spectacle, I left him to his
repose, and, when my uncle returned in the morning, represented his
character in such a favourable light, that the honest seaman was
affected with his distress, and determined to follow my example, in
presenting him with five pieces more; upon which, that I might save him
some confusion, I advised Mr. Bowling to inclose it in a letter to be
delivered by Strap, after we should be gone.

This was accordingly done. I took a formal leave of all my acquaintance
in the gaol; and, just as I was about to step into a hackney coach at
the gate, Jackson calling me, I returned, and he asked me in a whisper,
if I could lend him a shilling! His demand being so moderate, and in
all likelihood the last he would make upon me, I slipped a guinea into
his hand, which he no sooner perceived, than he cried, “O Jesus, a
guinea!” then laying hold of a button of my coat, broke out into
laughter; and when his immoderate fit of convulsion was ended, told me
I was an honest fellow, and let me go. The coachman was ordered to
drive to Mr. Bowling’s lodgings, where, when we arrived, he entered
into a serious discourse with me, on the subject of my situation, and
proposed that I should sail with him in quality of his surgeon; in
which case he would put me in a method of getting a fortune in a few
years by my own industry; and assured me, that I might expect to
inherit all that he should die possessed of, provided I should survive
him. Though I was penetrated with a sense of his generosity, l was
startled at a proposal that offered violence to my love, and signified
my sentiments on that head, which he did not seem to relish; but
observed that love was the fruit of idleness, that when once I should
be employed in business, and my mind engaged in making money, I should
be no more troubled with these silly notions, which none but your
fair-weathered Jacks, who have nothing but their pleasure to mind,
ought to entertain. I was piqued at this insinuation, which I looked
upon as a reproach, and, without giving myself time to deliberate,
accepted his offer. He was overjoyed at my compliance, carried me
immediately to his chief owner, with whom a bargain was struck; so that
then I could not retract with honour, had I been ever so much averse to
the agreement. That I might not have time to cool, he bade me draw out
a list of medicines for a complement of five hundred men, adapted to
the distempers of hot climates and sufficient for a voyage of eighteen
months; and carry it to a certain wholesale apothecary, who would also
provide me in two well-qualified mates. While I was thus employed Strap
came in, and looked very blank, when he understood my resolution:
however, after a pause of some minutes, he insisted upon going along
with me; and at my desire was made ship’s steward by Captain Bowling,
who promised to be at the expense of fitting him out, and to lend him
two hundred pounds to purchase an adventure.

When I had delivered my list of medicines, chosen a couple of my own
countrymen for mates, and bespoke a set of chirurgical instruments, my
uncle told me, that by his last voyage he had cleared almost three
thousand pounds, one-third of which he would immediately make over and
put into my hands; that he would procure for me credit to the value of
so much more in such goods as would turn to best account in the country
to which we were bound; and that, although he looked upon my interest
as his own, he would keep the remaining part of his fortune in his own
disposal, with a view of preserving his independence, and the power of
punishing me, in case I should not make a good use of what he had
already bestowed.

Without troubling the reader with an account of the effect which this
surprising generosity had upon my mind, I shall only say, that his
promises were instantly performed, and an invoice of merchandise proper
for the voyage presented to me, that I might purchase the goods, and
ship them with all expedition. In the midst of this hurry, the
remembrance of my charming Narcissa often interposed, and made me the
most miserable of all mortals. I was distracted with the thought of
being torn from her, perhaps for ever; and though the hope of seeing
her again might have supported me under the torments of separation, I
could not reflect upon the anguish she must feel at parting with me,
and the incessant sorrows to which her tender bosom would be exposed
during my absence, without being pierced with the deepest affliction!
As my imagination was daily and nightly upon the rack to invent some
method of mitigating this cruel stroke, or at least of acquitting my
love and honour in the opinion of this gentle creature, I at length
stumbled upon an expedient, with which the reader will be made
acquainted in due time; and, in consequence of my determination, became
less uneasy and disturbed.

My business being finished, and the ship ready to sail, I resolved to
make my last appearance among my acquaintance at the other end of the
town, where I had not been since my imprisonment; and as I had, by the
advice of my uncle, taken off some very rich clothes for sale, I put on
the gayest suit in my possession, and went in a chair to the
coffee-house I used to frequent, where I found my friend Banter so
confounded at the magnificence of my dress, that, when I made up to
him, he gazed at me with a look of astonishment, without being able,
for some minutes, to open his lips; then pulling me aside by the
sleeve, and fixing his eyes on mine, accosted me thus: “Random, where
the devil have you been! eh? What is the meaning of all this finery?
Oho! I understand you. You are just arrived from the country! what, the
roads are good, eh? Well, Random, you are a bold fellow, and a lucky
fellow! but take care, the pitcher goes often to the well, but is broke
at last.” So saying, he pointed to his collar; by which gesture, and
the broken hints he had ejaculated, I found he suspected me of having
robbed on the highway; and I laughed very heartily at his supposition.
Without explaining myself any further, I told him he was mistaken in
his conjecture; that I had been for some time past with the relation of
whom he had frequently heard me speak; and that, as I should set out
next day upon my travels, I had come to take my leave of my friends,
and to receive of him the money he had borrowed from me, which, now
that I was going abroad, I should certainly have occasion for. He was a
little disconcerted at this demand; but, recollecting himself in a
moment, swore in an affected passion, that I had used him extremely
ill, and he would never forgive me for having, by this short warning,
put it out of his power to free himself of an obligation he could no
longer bear. I could not help smiling at this pretended delicacy, which
I commended highly, telling him he needed not to be uneasy on that
score, for I would give him a direction to a merchant in the city, with
whom I would leave a discharge on the sum, to be delivered upon
payment. He professed much joy at this expedient, and with great
eagerness asked the person’s name and place of abode, which he
forthwith wrote in his pocket-book, assuring me, that he should not be
long in my debt. This affair, which I knew he should never after think
of, being settled to his satisfaction, I sent cards to all my friends,
desiring the favour of their company at a tavern in the evening, when
they honoured my invitation, and I had the pleasure of treating them in
a very elegant manner, at which they expressed equal admiration as
applause. Having enjoyed ourselves till midnight, I took my leave of
them, and was well nigh stifled with caresses: next day, I set out with
Strap in a postchaise for Gravesend, where we went on board; and the
wind serving, weighed anchor in less than twelve hours. Without meeting
with any accident, we reached the Downs, where we were obliged to come
to an anchor, and wait for an easterly wind to carry us out of the
Channel.




CHAPTER LXV


I set out for Sussex—consult Mrs. Sagely—achieve an Interview with
Narcissa—return to the Ship—we get clear of the Channel—I learn our
Destination—we are chased by a large Ship—the company are dismayed, and
encouraged by the Captain’s speech—our pursuer happens to be an English
Man of War—we arrive at the Coast of Guinea, purchase four hundred
Negroes—sail for Paraguay, get safe into the River of Plate, and sell
our Cargo to great Advantage


It was now I put in execution the scheme I had projected at London; and
asking leave of the captain for Strap and me to stay on shore till the
wind should become favourable, my request was granted, because he had
orders to remain in the Downs until he should receive some dispatches
from London, which he did not expect in less than a week. Having
imparted my resolution to my trusty valet, who (though he endeavoured
to dissuade me from such a rash undertaking) would not quit me in the
enterprise, I hired horses, and set out immediately for that part of
Sussex where my charmer was confined, which was not above thirty miles
distant from Deal, where we mounted. As I was perfectly well acquainted
with the extent of the squire’s estate and influence, I halted within
five miles of his house, where we remained till the twilight, at which
time we set forward, and, by the favour of a dark night, reached a
copse about half-a-mile from the village where Mrs. Sagely lived. Here
we left our horses tied to a tree, and went directly to the house of my
old benefactress, Strap trembling all the way, and venting ejaculatory
petitions to heaven for our safety. Her habitation being quite
solitary, we arrived at the door without being observed, when I ordered
my companion to enter by himself; and, in case there should be company
with her, deliver a letter which I had writ for that purpose, and say
that a friend of hers in London, understanding that he intended to
travel this road, had committed it to his care. He rapped at the door,
to which the good old matron coming, told him that, being a lone woman,
he must excuse her, if she did not open it, until he had declared his
name and business. He answered, that his name was unknown to her, and
that his business was to deliver a letter, which (to free her from all
apprehension) he would convey to her through the space between the door
and threshold. This he instantly performed: and she no sooner read the
contents, which specified my being present, than she cried, “If the
person who wrote this letter be at hand, let him speak, that I may be
assured by his voice whether or not I may safely admit him.” I
forthwith applied my mouth to the keyhole, and pronounced, “Dear
mother, you need not be afraid, it is I, so much indebted to your
goodness, who now crave admittance.” She knew my voice, and opening the
door immediately, received me with a truly maternal affection,
manifesting, by the tears she let fall, her concern lest I should be
discovered, for she had been informed of everything that had happened
between Narcissa and me from the dear captive’s own mouth. When I
explained the motive of my journey, which was no other than a desire of
seeing the object of my love before I should quit the kingdom, that I
might in person convince her of the necessity I was under to leave her,
reconcile her to that event, by describing the advantages that in all
probability would attend it, repeat my vows of eternal constancy, and
enjoy the melancholy pleasure of a tender embrace at parting. I say,
when I had thus signified my intention, Mrs. Sagely told me, that
Narcissa, upon her return from Bath, had been so strictly watched that
nobody but one or two of the servants devoted to her brother, was
admitted to her presence, that afterwards she had been a little
enlarged, and was permitted to see company; during which indulgence,
she had been several times at the cottage; but of late she had been
betrayed by one of the servants, who discovered to the squire, that he
had once carried a letter from her to the post-house directed to me;
upon which information she was now more confined than ever, and that I
could have no chance of seeing her, unless I would run the risk of
getting into the garden, where she and her maid were every day allowed
to take the air, and lie hid until I should have an opportunity of
speaking to them—an adventure attended with such danger, that no man in
his right wits would attempt it. This enterprise, hazardous as it was,
I resolved to perform, in spite of all the arguments of Mrs. Sagely,
who reasoned, chid, and entreated by turns; and the tears and prayers
of Strap, who conjured me on his knees, to have more regard to myself
as well as to him, than to attempt my own destruction in such a
precipitate manner. I was deaf to but the suggestions of my love; and
ordering him to return immediately with the horses to the inn from
whence we set out, and wait for my coming in that place, he at first
peremptorily refused to leave me, until I persuaded him, that if our
horses should remain where they were till daylight, they would
certainly be discovered, and the whole country alarmed. On this
consideration, he took his leave in a sorrowful plight, kissed my hand,
and, weeping, cried “God knows if ever I shall see you again.” My kind
landlady, finding me obstinate, gave me her best advice how to behave
in the execution of my project: and after having persuaded me to take a
little refreshment, accommodated me with a bed, and left me to my
repose. Early in the morning I arose, and armed with a couple of loaded
pistols and a hanger, went to the back part of the squire’s garden,
climbed over the wall, and, according to Mrs. Sagely’s direction,
concealed myself in a thicket, hard by an alcove that terminated a walk
at a good distance from the house, which (I was told) my mistress
mostly frequented. Here I absconded from five o’clock in the morning to
six in the evening, without seeing a human creature; at last I
perceived two women approaching, whom, by my throbbing heart, I soon
recognised to be the adorable Narcissa and Miss Williams. I felt the
strongest agitation of soul at the sight; and guessing, that they would
repose themselves in the alcove, stopped into it unperceived, and hid
upon the stone table a picture of myself in miniature, for which I had
sat in London, purposing to leave it with Narcissa before I should go
abroad. I exposed it in this manner, as an introduction to my own
appearance, which, without some previous intimation, I was afraid might
have an unlucky effect upon the delicate nerves of my fair enslaver;
and then withdrew into the thicket, where I could hear their discourse,
and suit myself to the circumstance of the occasion. As they advanced,
I observed an air of melancholy in the countenance of Narcissa, blended
with such unspeakable sweetness, that I could scarce refrain from
flying into her arms, and kissing away the pearly drop that stood
collected in each bewitching eye. According to my expectation, she
entered the alcove, and perceiving something on the table, took it up.
No sooner did she cast her eye upon the features, than, startled at the
resemblance, she cried, “Good God!” and the roses instantly vanished
from her cheeks. Her confidante, alarmed at this exclamation, looked at
the picture; and, struck with the likeness, exclaimed, “Jesus! the very
features of Mr. Random!” Narcissa, having recollected herself a little,
said, “Whatever angel brought it hither as a comfort to me in my
affliction, I am thankful for the benefit, and will preserve it as the
dearest object of my care.” So saying, she kissed it with surprising
ardour, shed a flood of tears, and then deposited the lifeless image in
her lovely bosom. Transported at these symptoms of her unaltered
affection, I was about to throw myself at her feet, when Miss Williams,
whose reflection was less engaged than that of her mistress, observed
that the picture could not transport itself hither, and that she could
not help thinking I was not far off. The gentle Narcissa, starting at
this conjecture, answered, “Heaven forbid! for although nothing in the
universe could yield me satisfaction equal to that of his presence for
one poor moment, in a proper place, I would rather forfeit his
company—almost for ever, than see him here, where his life would be
exposed to so much danger.” I could no longer restrain the impulse of
my passion, but, breaking from my concealment, stood before her, when
she uttered a fearful shriek, and fainted in the arms of her companion.
I flew towards the treasure of my soul, clasped her in my embrace, and
with the warmth of my kisses, brought her again to life. Oh that I were
endowed with the expression of a Raphael, the graces of a Guido, the
magic touches of a Titian, that I might represent the fond concern, the
chastened rapture and ingenuous blush, that mingled on her beauteous
face, when she opened her eyes upon me, and pronounced, “O heavens! is
it you?” I am afraid I have already encroached upon the reader’s
patience with the particulars of this amour, of which (I own) I cannot
help being impertinently circumstantial. I shall therefore omit the
less material passages of this interview, during which I convinced her
reason, though I could not appease the sad presages of her love, with
regard to the long voyage and dangers I must undergo. When we had spent
an hour (which was all she could spare from the barbarity of her
brother’s vigilance) in lamenting over our hard fate, and in repeating
our reciprocal vows, Miss Williams reminded us of the necessity there
was for our immediate parting; and, sure, lovers never parted with such
sorrow and reluctance as we. But because my words are incapable of
doing justice to this affecting circumstance, I am obliged to draw a
veil over it, and observe, that I returned in the dark to the house of
Mrs. Sagely, who was overjoyed to hear of my success, and opposed the
tumults of my grief with such strength of reason, that my mind
regained, in some measure, its tranquillity; and that very night, after
having forced upon the good gentlewoman a purse of twenty guineas, as a
token of my gratitude and esteem, I took my leave of her, and set out
on foot for the inn, where my arrival freed honest Strap from the
horrors of unutterable dread.

We took horse immediately, and alighted early next morning at Deal,
where I found my uncle in great concern on account of my absence,
because he had received his despatches, and must have weighed with the
first fair wind, whether I had been on board or not. Next day, a brisk
easterly gale springing up, we set sail, and in eight and forty hours
got clear of the Channel.

When we were about two hundred leagues to westward of the Land’s End,
the captain, taking me apart into the cabin, told me that, now he was
permitted by his instructions, he would disclose the intent and
destination of our voyage. “The ship,” said he, “which has been fitted
out at a great expense, is bound for the coast of Guinea, where we
shall exchange part of our cargo for slaves and gold dust, from whence
we will transport our negroes to Buenos Ayres in New Spain, where (by
virtue of passports, obtained from our own court, and that of Madrid)
we will dispose of them and the goods that remain on board for silver,
by means of our supercargo, who is perfectly well acquainted with the
coast, the lingo, and inhabitants.” Being thus let into the secret of
our expedition, I borrowed of the supercargo a Spanish grammar,
dictionary, and some other books of the same language, which I studied
with such application that, before we arrived in New Spain, I could
maintain a conversation with him in that tongue. Being arrived in the
warm latitudes, I ordered (with the captain’s consent) the whole ship’s
company to be blooded and purged, myself undergoing the same
evacuation, in order to prevent those dangerous fevers to which
northern constitutions are subject in hot climates; and I have reason
to believe, that this precaution was not unserviceable, for we lost but
one sailor during our whole passage to the coast.

One day, when we had been about five weeks at sea, we descried to
windward a large ship bearing down upon us with all the sail she could
carry. Upon which, my uncle ordered the studding-sails to be hoisted
and the ship to be cleared for engaging; but, finding that (to use the
seaman’s phrase) we were very much wronged by the ship which had us in
chase, and by this time had hoisted French colours, he commanded the
studding-sails to be taken in, the courses to be clowed up, the main
topsail to be backed, the tompions to be taken out of the guns, and
every man to repair to his quarters. While every body was busied in the
performance of these orders, Strap came upon the quarter-deck,
trembling and looking aghast, and, with a voice half-suppressed by
fear, asked if I thought we were a match for the vessel in pursuit of
us. Observing his consternation, I said, “What! are you afraid, Strap.”
“Afraid! (he replied); n-n-no; what should I be afraid of? I thank God
I have a clear conscience; but I believe it will be a bloody battle,
and I wish you may not have occasion for another hand to assist you in
the cockpit.” I immediately perceived his drift, and making the captain
acquainted with his situation, desired he might be stationed below with
me and my mates. My uncle, incensed at his pusillanimity, bade me send
him down instantly, that his fear might not infect the ship’s company;
whereupon I told the poor steward that I had begged him for my
assistant, and desired him to go down and help my mates to get ready
the instruments and dressings. Notwithstanding the satisfaction he must
have felt at those tidings, he affected a shyness of quitting the upper
deck; and said, he hoped I did not imagine he was afraid to do his duty
above board; for he believed himself as well prepared for death as any
man in the ship, no disparagement to me or the captain. I was disgusted
at this affectation; and, in order to punish his hypocrisy, assured him
he might take his choice, either of going down to the cockpit with me,
or staying upon deck during the engagement. Alarmed at this
indifference, he replied, “Well, to oblige you, I’ll go down, but
remember it is more for your sake than my own.” So saying, he
disappeared in a twinkling, without waiting for an answer.

By this time, we could observe two tier of guns in the ship which
pursued us, and which was now but two short miles astern. This
discovery had an evident effect upon the sailors, who did not scruple
to say, that we should be torn to pieces, and blown out of the water,
and that, if in case any of them should lose their precious limbs, they
must go a begging for life, for there was no provision made by the
merchants for those poor souls who are maimed in their service. The
captain, understanding this, ordered the crew abaft, and spoke to them
thus: “My lads, I am told you hang an a—se. I have gone to sea thirty
years, a man and a boy, and never saw English sailors afraid before.
Mayhap you may think I want to expose you for the lucre of gain.
Whosoever thinks so, thinks a d—ned lie, for my whole cargo is insured;
so that, in case I should be taken, my loss would not be great. The
enemy is stronger than we, to be sure. What then? have we not a chance
for carrying away one of her masts, and so get clear of her? If we find
her too hard for us, ’tis but striking at last. If any man is hurt in
the engagement, I promise on the word of an honest seaman, to make him
a recompense according to his loss. So now, you that are lazy,
lubberly, cowardly dogs, get away and skulk in the hold and bread-room;
and you, that are jolly boys, stand by me, and let us give one
broadside for the honour of Old England.” This eloquent harangue was so
well adapted to the disposition of his hearers, that one and all of
them, pulling off their hats, waved them over their heads, and saluted
him with three cheers; upon which he sent his boy for two large
case-bottles of brandy: having treated every man with a dram, they
repaired to their quarters, and waited impatiently for the word of
command. I must do my uncle the justice to say, that in the whole of
his disposition, he behaved with the utmost intrepidity, conduct, and
deliberation. The enemy being very near, he ordered me to my station,
and was just going to give the word for hoisting the colours, and
firing, when the supposed Frenchman hauled down his white pennant,
jack, and ensign, hoisted English ones, and fired a gun a-head of us.
This was a joyful event to Captain Bowling, who immediately showed his
colours, and fired a gun to leeward; upon which the other ship ran
alongside of us, hailed him, and, giving him to know that she was an
English man-of-war of forty guns, ordered him to hoist out his boat and
come on board. This command he obeyed with the more alacrity, because,
upon inquiry, he found that she was commanded by an old messmate of
his, who was overjoyed to see him, detained him to dinner, and sent his
barge for the supercargo and me, who were very much caressed on his
account. As this commander was destined to cruise upon the French in
the latitude of Martinico, his stem and quarters were adorned with
white fleurs-de-lis, and the whole shell of the ship so much disguised
for a decoy to the enemy, that it was no wonder my uncle did not know
her, although he had sailed on board of her many years. We kept company
with her four days, during which time the captains were never asunder,
and then parted, our course lying different from hers.

In less than fortnight after our separation, we made the land of
Guinea, near the mouth of the River Gambia; and trading along the coast
as far to the southward of the Line as Angola and Bengula, in less than
six months disposed of the greatest part of our cargo, and purchased
four hundred negroes, my adventure having been laid out in gold dust.

Our complement being made up, we took our departure from Cape Negroe,
and arrived in the Rio de la Plata in six weeks, having met with
nothing remarkable in our voyage, except an epidemic fever, not unlike
the jail distemper, which broke out among our slaves and carried off a
good many of the ship’s company; among whom I lost one of my mates, and
poor Strap had well nigh given up the ghost. Having produced our
passport to the Spanish governor, we were received with great courtesy,
sold our slaves in a very few days, and could have put off five times
the number at our own price; though we were obliged to smuggle the rest
of our merchandise, consisting of European bale-goods, which however we
made shift to dispose of at a great advantage.




CHAPTER LXVI


I am invited to the Villa of a Spanish Don, where we went with an
English Gentleman, and make a very interesting discovery—we leave
Buenos Ayres, and arrive at Jamaica


Our ship being freed from the disagreeable lading of negroes, to whom,
indeed, I had been a miserable slave since our leaving the coast of
Guinea, I began to enjoy myself, and breathe with pleasure the pure air
of Paraguay, this part of which is reckoned the Montpelier of South
America, and has obtained, on account of its climate, the name of
Buenos Ayres. It was in this delicious place that I gave myself
entirely up to the thoughts of my dear Narcissa, whose image still kept
possession of my breast, and whose charms, enhanced by absence,
appeared to my imagination, if possible, more engaging than ever! I
calculated the profits of my voyage, which even exceeded my
expectation; resolved to purchase sinecure upon my arrival in England,
and if I should find the squire as averse to me as ever, marry his
sister by stealth; and in case our family should increase, rely on the
generosity of my uncle, who was by this time worth a considerable sum.

While I amused myself with these agreeable projects, and the
transporting thoughts of enjoying Narcissa, we were very much caressed
by the Spanish gentlemen, who frequently formed parties of pleasure for
our entertainment, in which we made excursions a good way into the
country. Among those who signalised themselves by their civility to us,
was one Don Antonio de Ribera, a very polite young gentleman, with whom
I had contracted an intimate friendship, who invited us one day to his
country house, and, as a further inducement to our compliance, promised
to procure for us the company of an English Signor, who had been
settled in those parts many years and acquired the love and esteem of
the whole province by his affability, good sense, and honourable
behaviour.

We accepted his invitation, and set out for his villa, where we had not
been longer than an hour, when the person arrived in whose favour I had
been so much prepossessed. He was a tall man, remarkably well shaped,
of a fine mien and appearance, commanding respect, and seemed to be
turned of forty; the features of his face were saddened with a reserve
and gravity, which in other countries would have been thought the
effect of melancholy; but here appeared to have been contracted by his
commerce with the Spaniards, who are remarkable for that severity of
countenance. Understanding from Don Antonio that we were his
countrymen, he saluted us all round very complacently, and fixing his
eyes attentively on me, uttered a deep sigh. I had been struck with a
profound veneration for him at his first coming into the room; and no
sooner observed this expression of his sorrow, directed, as it were, in
a particular manner to me, that my heart took part in his grief; I
sympathised involuntarily and sighed in my turn. Having asked leave of
our entertainer, he accosted us in English, professed his satisfaction
at seeing so many of his countrymen in such a remote place, and asked
the captain, who went by the name of Signor Thoma, from what part of
Britain he had sailed and whither he was bound. My uncle told him that
we had sailed from the River Thames, and were bound for the same plane
by the way of Jamaica, where we intended to take in a lading of sugar.

Having satisfied himself in these and other particulars about the state
of the war, he gave us to understand, that he had a longing desire to
revisit his native country, in consequence of which he had already
transmitted to Europe the greatest part of his fortune in neutral
bottoms, and would willingly embark the rest of it with himself in our
ship, provided the captain had no objection to such a passenger. My
uncle very prudently replied, that for his part he should be glad of
his company, if he could procure the consent of the governor, without
which he durst not take him on board, whatever inclination he had to
oblige him. The gentleman approved of his discretion, and telling him
that there would be no difficulty in obtaining the connivance of the
governor, who was his good friend, shifted the conversation to another
subject.

I was overjoyed to hear his intention, and already interested myself so
much in his favour that, had he been disappointed, I should have been
very unhappy. In the course of our entertainment, he eyed me with
uncommon attachment, I felt a surprising attraction towards him; when
he spoke, I listened with attention and reverence; the dignity of his
deportment filled me with affection and awe; and, in short, the
emotions of my soul, in presence of this stranger, were strong and
unaccountable.

Having spent the best part of the day with us, he took his leave,
telling Captain Thoma, that he should hear from him in a short time. He
was no sooner gone than I asked a thousand questions about him of Don
Antonio, who could give me no other satisfaction than that his name was
Don Rodrigo, that he had lived fifteen or sixteen years in these parts,
was reputed rich, and supposed to have been unfortunate in his younger
years, because he was observed to nourish a pensive melancholy, even
from the time of his first settlement among them; but that nobody had
ventured to inquire into the cause of his sorrow, in consideration of
his peace, which might suffer in the recapitulation of his misfortunes.

I was seized with an irresistible desire of knowing the particulars of
his fate, and enjoyed not an hour of repose during the whole night, by
reason of the eager conceptions that inspired me with regard to his
story, which I resolved (if possible) to learn. Next morning, while we
were at breakfast, three mules, richly caparisoned, arrived with a
message from Don Rodrigo, desiring our company, and that of Don
Antonio, at his house, which was situated about ten miles further up in
the country. I was pleased with this invitation, in consequence of
which we mounted the mules which he had provided for us, and alighted
at his house before noon. Here we were splendidly entertained by the
generous stranger, who still seemed to show a particular regard for me,
and after dinner made me a present of a ring, set with a beautiful
amethyst, the production of that country, saying, at the same time,
that he was once blessed with a son, who, had he lived, would have been
nearly of my age. This observation, delivered with a profound sigh,
made my heart throb with violence: a crowd of confused ideas rushed
upon my imagination, which, while I endeavoured to unravel, my uncle
perceived my absence of thought, and tapping me on the shoulder, said,
“Oons, are you asleep, Rory?” Before I had time to reply, Don Rodrigo,
with uncommon eagerness of voice and look, pronounced, “Pray, captain,
what is the young gentleman’s name?” “His name,” said my uncle, “is
Roderick Random.” “Gracious Powers!” cried the stranger, starting
up—“And his mother’s?” “His mother,” answered the captain, amazed, “was
called Charlotte Bowling.” “O bounteous Heaven!” exclaimed Don Rodrigo,
springing across the table, and clasping me in his arms, “my son! my
son! have I found thee again? do I hold thee in my embrace, after
having lost and despaired of seeing thee so long?” So saying, he fell
upon my neck, and wept aloud with joy; while the power of nature
operating strongly in my breast. I was lost in rapture, and while he
pressed me to his heart, let fall a shower of tears in his bosom. His
utterance was choked up a good while by the agitation of his soul; at
length he broke out into “Mysterious Providence!—O my dear Charlotte,
there yet remains a pledge of our love! and such a pledge!—so found! O
infinite Goodness, let me adore thy all-wise decrees!” Having thus
expressed himself, he kneeled upon the floor, lifted up his eyes and
hands to heaven, and remained some minutes in silent ecstacy of
devotion. I put myself in the same posture, adored the all-good
Dispenser in a prayer of mental thanksgiving: and when his ejaculation
was ended, did homage to my father, and craved his paternal blessing.
He hugged me again with unutterable fondness, and having implored the
protection of Heaven upon my head, raised me from the ground, and
presented me as his son to the company, who wept in concert over this
affecting scene. Among the rest, my uncle did not fail to discover the
goodness and joy of his heart. Albeit unused to the melting mood, he
blubbered with great tenderness, and wringing my father’s hand, cried,
“Brother Random, I’m rejoiced to see you—God be praised for this happy
meeting!” Don Rodrigo, understanding that he was his brother-in-law,
embraced him affectionately, saying, “Are you my Charlotte’s brother?
Alas! unhappy Charlotte! but why should I repine? we shall meet again,
never more to part! Brother, you are truly welcome. Dear son, I am
transported with unspeakable joy! This day is a jubilee—my friends and
servants shall share my satisfaction.”

While he dispatched messengers to the gentlemen in the neighbourhood,
to announce this event, and gave orders for a grand entertainment, I
was so much affected with the tumults of passion, which assailed me on
this great, sudden, and unexpected occasion, that I fell sick, fevered,
and in less than three hours became quite delirious: so that the
preparations were countermanded, and the joy of the family converted
into grief and despair. Physicians were instantly called, I was
plentifully blooded in the foot, my lower extremities were bathed in a
decoction of salutiferous herbs: in ten hours after I was taken ill I
enjoyed a critical sweat, and next day felt the remains of the
distemper, but an agreeable lassitude, which did not hinder me from
getting up. During the progress of this fever, which, from the term or
its duration, is called ephemera, my father never once quitted my
bedside, but administered the prescriptions of the physicians with the
most pious care; while Captain Bowling manifested his concern by the
like attendance. I no sooner found myself delivered from this disease,
than I bethought myself of my honest friend Strap; and resolving to
make him happy forthwith in the knowledge of my good fortune, told my
father in general, that I had been infinitely obliged to this faithful
adherent, and begged he would indulge me so far as to send for him,
without letting him know my happiness, until he could receive an
account of it from my own mouth.

My request was instantly complied with, and a messenger with a spare
mule despatched to the ship, carrying orders from the captain to the
mate, to send the steward by the bearer. My health being, in the
meantime, re-established, and my mind composed I began to relish this
important turn of my fortune, in reflecting upon the advantages with
which it must be attended; and, as the idea of my lovely Narcissa
always joined itself to every scene of happiness I could imagine, I
entertained myself now with the prospect of possessing her in that
distinguished sphere to which she was entitled by her birth and
qualifications. Having often mentioned her name while I was deprived of
my senses, my father guessed that there was an intimate connection
between us, and discovering the picture which hung in my bosom by
ribbon, did not doubt that it was the resemblance of my amiable
mistress. In this belief he was confirmed by my uncle, who told him
that it was the picture of a young woman, to whom I was under promise
of marriage. Alarmed at this piece of information, Don Rodrigo took the
first opportunity of questioning me about the particulars of this
affair, which when I had candidly recounted, he approved of my passion,
and promised to contribute all in his power towards its success. Though
I never doubted his generosity, I was transported on this occasion, and
throwing myself at his feet, told him, he had now completed my
happiness, for, without the possession of Narcissa I should be
miserable among all the pleasures of life. He raised me with a smile of
paternal fondness; said he knew what it was to be in love; and observed
that, if he had been as tenderly beloved by his father as I was by
mine, he should not now perhaps have cause—here he was interrupted by a
sigh, the tear rushed into his eye, suppressed the dictates of his
grief, and the time being opportune, desired me to relate the passages
of my life, which my uncle had told him were manifold and surprising. I
recounted the most material circumstances of my fortune, to which he
listened with wonder and attention, manifesting from time to time the
different emotions which my different situations may be supposed to
have raised in a parent’s breast; and, when my detail was ended,
blessed God for the adversity I had undergone, which, he said, enlarged
the understanding, improved the heart, steeled the constitution, and
qualified a young man for all the duties and enjoyments of life much
better than any education which affluence could bestow.

When I had thus satisfied his curiosity, I discovered an inclination to
hear the particulars of his story, which he gratified by beginning with
his marriage, and proceeded to the day of his disappearing, as I have
related in the first part of my memoirs. “Careless of life,” continued
he, “and unable to live in a place where every object recalled the
memory of my dear Charlotte, whom I had lost through the barbarity of
an unnatural parent, I took my leave of you, my child, then an infant,
with a heart full of unutterable woe, but little suspecting that my
father’s unkindness would have descended to my innocent orphan; and
setting out alone at midnight for the nearest seaport, early next
morning got on board a ship, bound, as I had heard, for France; and,
bargaining with the master for my passage, bade a long adieu to my
native country, and put to sea with the first fair wind. The place of
our destination was Granville, but we had the misfortune to run upon a
ridge of rocks near the Island of Alderney, called the Caskets, where
the sea running high, the ship went to pieces, the boat sunk alongside,
and every soul on board perished, except myself, who, by the assistance
of a grating got ashore on the coast of Normandy. I went directly to
Caen, where I was so lucky as to meet with a count, whom I had formerly
known in my travels; with this gentleman I set out for Paris, where I
was recommended by him and other friends, as tutor to a young nobleman,
whom I accompanied to the court of Spain. There we remained a whole
year, at the end of which my pupil being recalled by his father, I
quitted my office, and stayed behind, by the advice of a certain
Spanish grandee, who took me into his protection, and introduced me to
another nobleman, who was afterwards created viceroy of Peru. He
insisted on my attending, him to his government of the Indies, where,
however, by reason of my religion, it was not in his power to make my
fortune any other way than by encouraging me to trade, which I had not
long prosecuted when my patron died, and I found myself in the midst of
strangers, without one friend to support or protect me. Urged by this
consideration, I sold my effects, and removed to this country, the
governor of which, having been appointed by the viceroy, was my
intimate acquaintance. Here has heaven prospered my endeavours, during
a residence of sixteen years, in which my tranquillity was never
invaded but by the remembrance of your mother, whose death I have in
secret mourned without ceasing, and the reflection of you, whose fate I
could never learn notwithstanding all my inquiries by means of my
friends in France, who, after the most strict examination, could give
me no other account than that you went abroad six years ago, and was
never after heard of. I could not rest satisfied with this imperfect
information, and, though my hope of finding you was but languid,
resolved to go in quest of you in person; for which purpose, I have
remitted to Holland the value of twenty thousand pounds, and am in
possession of fifteen thousand more, with which I intended to embark
myself on board of Captain Bowling, before I discovered this amazing
stroke of Providence, which, you may be sure, has not altered my
intention.”

My father, having entertained us with this agreeable sketch of his
life, withdrew, in order to relieve Don Antonio, who, in his absence,
had done the honours of his house; and I was just dressed for my
appearance among the guests, when Strap arrived from the ship.

He no sooner entered the grand apartment in which I was, and saw the
magnificence of my apparel, than his speech was lost in amazement, and
he gaped in silence at the objects that surrounded him. I took him by
the hand, observed that I had sent for him to be a witness and sharer
of my happiness, and told him I had found a father. At these words he
started, and, after having continued some minutes with his mouth and
eyes wide open, cried, “Ah!—odd, I know what! go thy ways, poor
Narcissa, and go thy ways somebody else—well—Lord, what a thing is
love! God help us! are all our mad pranks and protestations come to
this? And have you fixed your habitation in this distant land? God
prosper you—I find we must part at last—for I would not leave my poor
carcase so far from my native home, for all the wealth of the
universe!” With these ejaculations, he began to sob and make wry faces;
upon which I assured him of his mistake, both in regard to my staying
in Paraguay, and informed him, as briefly as I could, of the great
event that had happened. Never was rapture more ludicrously expressed
than in the behaviour of this worthy creature, who cried, laughed,
whistled, sung, and danced, all in a breath. His transport was scarce
over, when my father entered, who no sooner understood that this was
Strap, than he took him by the hand, saying, “Is this the honest man
who befriended you so much in your distress? You are welcome to my
house, and I will soon put it in the power of my son to reward you for
your good offices in his behalf; in the meantime go with us and partake
of the repast that is provided.” Strap, wild as he was with joy, would
by no means accept of the proffered honour, crying, “God forbid! I know
my distance—your worship shall excuse me.” And Don Rodrigo, finding his
modesty invincible, recommended him to his major-domo, to be treated
with the utmost respect; while he carried me in a large saloon, where I
was presented to a numerous company, who loaded me with compliments and
caresses, and congratulated my father in terms not proper for me to
repeat.

Without specifying the particulars of our entertainment, let it suffice
to say, it was at the same time elegant and sumptuous, and the
rejoicings lasted two days; after which, Don Rodrigo settled his
affairs, converted his effects into silver and gold, visited and took
leave of all his friends, who were grieved at his departure, and
honoured me with considerable presents; and, coming on board of my
uncle’s ship, with the first fair wind we sailed from the Rio de la
Plata, and in two months came safe to an anchor in the harbour of
Kingston, in the Island of Jamaica.




CHAPTER LXVII


I visit my old Friend Thompson—we set sail for Europe—meet with an odd
Adventure—arrive in England—I ride across the Country from Portsmouth
to Sussex—converse with Mrs. Sagely, who informs me of Narcissa’s being
in London—in consequence of this Intelligence, I proceed to
Canterbury—meet with my old friend Morgan—arrive in London—visit
Narcissa—introduce my Father to be—he is charmed with her good sense
and beauty—we come to a Determination of demanding her Brother’s
Consent to our Marriage


I inquired, as soon as I got ashore, about my generous companion, Mr.
Thompson, and hearing that he lived in a flourishing condition upon the
estate left him by his wife’s father, who had been dead some years, I
took horse immediately, with the consent of Don Rodrigo, who had heard
me mention him with great regard, and in a few hours reached the place
of his habitation.

I should much wrong the delicacy of Mr. Thompson’s sentiments to say
barely he was glad to see me: he felt all that the most sensible and
disinterested friendship could feel on this occasion, introduced me to
his wife, a very amiable young lady, who had already blessed him with
two fine children, and being as yet ignorant of my circumstances,
frankly offered me the assistance of his purse and interest. I thanked
him for his generous intention, and made him acquainted with my
situation, on which he congratulated me with great joy, and, after I
had stayed with him a whole day and night, accompanied me back to
Kingston, to wait upon my father, whom he invited to his house. Don
Rodrigo complied with his request, and, having been handsomely
entertained during the space of a week, returned extremely well
satisfied with the behaviour of my friend and his lady, to whom, at
parting, he presented a very valuable diamond ring, as a token of his
esteem. During the course of my conversation with Mr. Thompson, he gave
me to understand, that his old commander Captain Oakum was dead some
months, and that, immediately after his death, a discovery had been
made of some valuable effects that he had feloniously secreted out of a
prize by the assistance of Dr. Mackshane, who was now actually in
prison on that account, and, being destitute of friends, subsisted
solely on the charity of my friend, whose bounty he had implored in the
most abject manner, after having been the barbarous occasion of driving
him to that terrible extremity on board of The Thunder, which we have
formerly related. Whatsoever this wretch had been guilty of, I
applauded Mr. Thompson’s generosity towards him in his distress, which
wrought so much upon me also, that I sent him ten pistoles, in such a
private manner that he could never know his benefactor.

While my father and I were caressed among the gentlemen on shore,
Captain Bowling had written to his owners, by the packet, which sailed
a few days after our arrival, signifying his prosperous voyage
hitherto, and desiring them to insure his ship and cargo homeward
bound: after which precaution he applied himself so heartily to the
task of loading his ship that, with the assistance of Mr. Thompson, she
was full in less than six weeks. This kind gentleman likewise procured
for Don Rodrigo bills upon London for the greatest part of his gold and
silver, by which means it was secured against the risk of the seas and
the enemy; and, before we sailed, supplied us with such large
quantities of all kinds of stock, that not only we, but the ship’s
company, fared sumptuously during the voyage.

Everything being ready, we took our leave of our kind entertainers,
and, going on board at Port Royal, set sail for England on the first
day of June. We beat up to windward, with fine easy weather, and one
night believing ourselves near Cape Tiberon, lay to, with an intention
to wood and water next morning in the bay. While we remained in this
situation, a sailor, having drunk more new rum than he could carry,
staggered over board, and, notwithstanding all the means that could be
used to preserve him, went to the bottom, and disappeared. About two
hours after this melancholy accident happened, as I enjoyed the cool
air on the quarter-deck, I heard a voice rising, as it were, out of the
sea and calling, “Ho, the ship ahoy!” Upon which one of the men upon
the forecastle cried, “I’ll be d—n’d if that an’t Jack Marlinspike, who
went overboard!” Not a little surprised at this event, I jumped into
the boat that lay alongside, with the second mate and four men, and
rowing towards the place from whence the voice (which repeated the
hail) seemed to proceed, we perceived something floating upon the
water. When we had rowed a little further, we discerned it to be a man
riding upon a hencoop, who, seeing us approach, pronounced with a
hoarse voice, “D—n your bloods! why did you not answer when I hailed?”
Our mate, who was a veritable seaman, hearing his salute, said, “By G—,
my lads, this is none of our man. This is the devil—pull away for the
ship.” The fellows obeyed his command without question, and were
already some fathoms on our return, when I insisted on their taking up
the poor creature, and prevailed upon them to go back to the wreck,
which when we came near the second time, and signified our intention,
we received an answer of “Avast, avast—what ship, brother?” Being
satisfied in this particular, he cried, “D—n the ship, I was in hopes
it had been my own—where are you bound?” We satisfied his curiosity in
this particular too; upon which he suffered himself to be taken on
board, and, after having been comforted with a dram, told us, he
belonged to the Vesuvio man-of-war, upon a cruise off the island of
Hispaniola; that he had fallen overboard four-and-twenty hours ago, and
the ship being under sail, they did not choose to bring to, but tossed
a hencoop overboard for his convenience, upon which he was in good
hopes of reaching the Cape next morning: howsomever, he was as well
content to be aboard of us because he did not doubt that we should meet
his ship, and if he had gone ashore in the bay, he might have been
taken prisoner by the French. My uncle and father were very much
diverted with the account of this fellow’s unconcerned behaviour; and
in two days, meeting with the Vesuvio, as he expected, sent him on
board of her, according to his desire.

Having beat up successfully the windward passage, we stretched to the
northward, and falling in with a westerly wind, in eight weeks arrived
in the soundings, and in two days after made for the Lizard. It is
impossible to express the joy I felt at the sight of English ground!
Don Rodrigo was not unmoved, and Strap shed tears of gladness. The
sailors profited by our satisfaction, the shoe that was nailed to the
mast being quite filled with our liberality. My uncle resolved to run
up into the Downs at once, but the wind shifting when we were abreast
of the Isle of Wight, he was obliged to turn into St. Helen’s, and come
to Spithead, to the great mortification of the crew, thirty of whom
were immediately pressed on board a man-of-war.

My father and I went ashore immediately at Portsmouth, leaving Strap
with the captain to go round with the ship and take care of our
effects; and I discovered so much impatience to see my charming
Narcissa, that my father permitted me to ride across the country to her
brother’s house; while he should hire a post-chaise for London, where
he would wait for me at a place to which I directed him.

Fired with all the eagerness of passion, I took post that very night,
and in the morning reached an inn about three miles from the squire’s
habitation; here I remained till next morning, allaying the torture of
my impatience with the rapturous hope of seeing that divine creature
after an absence of eighteen months, which, far from impairing, had
raised my love to the most exalted pitch! Neither were my reflections
free from apprehensions: that something intervened in spite of all my
hope, and represented her as having yielded to the importunity of her
brother and blessed the arms of a happy rival. My thoughts were even
maddened with the fear of her death; and, when I arrived in the dark at
the house of Mrs. Sagely, I had not for some time courage to desire
admittance, lest my soul should be shocked with dismal tidings. At
length, however, I knocked, and no sooner certified the good
gentlewoman of my voice than she opened the door, and received me with
the most affectionate embrace, that brought tears into her aged eyes:
“For heaven’s sake, dear mother,” cried I, “tell me how is Narcissa? is
she the same that I left her?” She blessed my ears with saying, “She is
as beautiful, in as good health, and as much yours as ever.”
Transported at this assurance, I begged to know if I could not see her
that very night, when this sage matron gave me to understand that my
mistress was in London, and that things were strangely altered in the
squire’s house since my departure; that he had been married a whole
year to Melinda, who at first found means to wean his attention so much
from Narcissa, that he became quite careless of that lovely sister,
comforting himself with the clause in his father’s will, by which she
should forfeit her fortune, by marrying without his consent: that my
mistress, being but indifferently treated by her sister-in-law, had
made use of her freedom some months ago, and gone to town, where she
was lodged with Miss Williams, in expectation of my arrival; and had
been pestered with the addresses of Lord Quiverwit, who, finding her
heart engaged, had fallen upon a great many shifts to persuade her that
I was dead; but, finding all his artifices unsuccessful, and despairing
of gaining her affection, he had consoled himself for her indifference,
by marrying another lady some weeks ago, who had already left him on
account of some family uneasiness. Besides this interesting
information, she told me there was not a great deal of harmony between
Melinda and the squire, who was so much disgusted at the number of
gallants who continued to hover about her even after her marriage, that
he had hurried her down into the country, much against her own
inclination, where their mutual animosities had risen to such a height,
that they preserved no decency before company or servants, but abused
one another in the grossest terms.

This good old gentlewoman, to give me a convincing proof of my dear
Narcissa’s unalterable love, gratified me with a sight of the last
letter she had favoured her with, in which I was mentioned with so much
honour, tenderness, and concern, that my soul was fired with
impatience, and I determined to ride all night, that I might have it
the sooner in my power to make her happy. Mrs. Sagely, perceiving my
eagerness, and her maternal affection being equally divided between
Narcissa and me, begged leave to remind me of the sentiments with which
I went abroad, that would not permit me for any selfish gratification
to prejudice the fortune of that amiable young lady, who must entirely
depend upon me, after having bestowed herself in marriage. I thanked
her for her kind concern, and as briefly as possible described my
flourishing situation, which afforded this humane person infinite
wonder and satisfaction. I told her, that now I had an opportunity to
manifest my gratitude for the many obligations I owed, I would
endeavour to make her old age comfortable and easy; as a step to which
I proposed she should come and live with Narcissa and me. This
venerable gentlewoman was so much affected with my words, that the
tears ran down her ancient cheeks; she thanked heaven that I had not
belied the presages she had made, on her first acquaintance with me;
acknowledging my generosity, as she called it, in the most elegant and
pathetic expressions; but declined my proposal, on account of her
attachment to the dear melancholy cottage where she had so peacefully
consumed her solitary widowhood. Finding her immovable on this subject,
I insisted on her accepting a present of thirty guineas, and took my
leave, resolving to accommodate her with the same sum annually, for the
more comfortable support of the infirmities of old age.

Having rode all night, I found myself at Canterbury in the morning,
where I alighted to procure fresh horses; and, as I walked into the
inn, perceived an apothecary’s on the other side of the street, with
the name of Morgan over the door; alarmed at this discovery, I could
not help thinking that my old messmate had settled in this place, and
upon inquiry found my conjecture true, and that he was married lately
to a widow in that city, by whom he had got three thousand pounds.
Rejoiced at this intelligence, I went to his shop as soon as it was
open, and found my friend behind the counter, busy in preparing a
clyster. I saluted him at entrance, with, “Your servant, Mr. Morgan.”
Upon which he looked at me, and replying, “Your most humble servant,
good sir,” rubbed his ingredients in the mortar without any emotion.
“What,” said I, “Morgan, have you forgot your old messmate?” At these
words he looked up again, and starting, cried, “As Cot is my—sure it
cannot—yes, by my salfation, I pelieve it is my dear friend Mr.
Rantom.” He was no sooner convinced of my identity, than he threw down
the pestle, overset the mortar, and jumping over the board, swept up
the contents with his clothes, flew about my neck, hugged me
affectionately, and daubed me all over with turpentine and the yolks of
eggs which he had been mixing when I came in. Our mutual
congratulations being over, he told me, that he found himself a widower
upon his return from the West Indies; that he had got interest to be
appointed surgeon of a man-of-war, in which capacity he had served some
years, until he married an apothecary’s widow, with whom he now enjoyed
a pretty good sum of money, peace, and quiet, and an indifferent good
trade. He was very desirous of hearing my adventures, which I assured
him I had not time to relate, but told him in general, my circumstances
were very good, and that I hoped to see him when I should not be in
such a hurry as at present. He insisted, however, on my staying
breakfast, and introduced me to his wife, who seemed to be a decent
sensible woman, pretty well stricken in years. In the course of our
conversation, he showed the sleeve-buttons I had exchanged with him at
our parting in the West Indies, and was not a little proud to see that
I had preserved his with the same care. When I informed him of
Mackshane’s condition, he seemed at first to exult over his distress;
but, after a little recollection, said, “Well, he has paid for his
malice; I forgife him, and may Cot forgife him likewise.” He expressed
great concern for the soul of Captain Oakum, which he believed was now
gnashing its teeth; but it was some time before I could convince him of
Thompson’s being alive, at whose good fortune, nevertheless, he was
extremely glad.

Having renewed our protestations of friendship, I bade the honest
Welshman and his spouse farewell, and, taking post-horses, arrived at
London that same night, where I found my father in good health, to whom
I imparted what I had learned of Narcissa. This indulgent parent
approved of my intention of marrying her, even without fortune,
provided her brother’s consent could not be obtained; promised to make
over to me in a few days a sufficiency to maintain her in a fashionable
manner and expressed a desire of seeing this amiable creature, who had
captivated me so much. As I had not slept the night before, and was
besides fatigued with my journey, I found myself under a necessity of
taking some repose, and went to bed accordingly: next morning, about
ten o’clock, took a chair, and according to Mrs. Sagely’s directions,
went to my charmer’s lodgings, and inquired for Miss Williams. I had
not waited in the parlour longer than a minute, when this young woman
entered, and no sooner perceived me, than she shrieked and ran
backward: but I got between her and the door, and clasping her in my
arms, brought her to herself with an embrace. “Good heaven,” cried she,
“Mr. Random, is it you indeed? My mistress will run distracted with
joy.” I told her, it was from an apprehension that my sudden appearance
might have had some bad effect on my dear Narcissa, that I had desired
to see her first, in order to concert some method of acquainting her
mistress gradually with my arrival. She approved of my conduct, and,
after having yielded to the suggestions of her own friendship, in
asking if my voyage had been successful, charged herself with that
office, and left me glowing with desire of seeing and embracing the
object of my love. In a very little time I heard some body coming down
the stairs in haste, and the voice of my angel pronounce, with an eager
tone, “O heaven! is it possible! where is he?” How were my faculties
aroused at this well known sound! and how was my soul transported when
she broke in upon my view in all the bloom of ripened beauty! Grace was
in all her steps, heaven in her eye, in every gesture dignity and love!
You, whose souls are susceptible of the most delicate impressions,
whose tender bosoms have felt the affecting vicissitudes of love, who
have suffered an absence of eighteen long months from the dear object
of your hope, and found at your return the melting fair as kind and
constant as your heart can wish, do me justice on this occasion, and
conceive what unutterable rapture possessed us both, while we flew into
each other’s arms! This was no time for speech: locked in a mutual
embrace, we continued some minutes in a silent trance of joy! When I
thus encircled all my soul held dear—while I hung over her
beauties—beheld her eyes sparkle, and every feature flush with virtuous
fondness—when I saw her enchanting bosom heave with undissembled
rapture, and knew myself the happy cause—heavens! what was my
situation! I am tempted to commit my paper to the flames, and to
renounce my pen for ever, because its most ardent and lucky expression
so poorly describes the emotions of my soul. “O adorable Narcissa!”
cried I, “O miracle of beauty, love and truth! I at last fold thee in
my arms! I at last can call thee mine! No jealous brother shall thwart
our happiness again; fortune hath at length recompensed me for all my
sufferings, and enabled me to do justice to my love.” The dear creature
smiled ineffably charmingly, and, with a look of bewitching tenderness,
said, “and shall we never part again?” “Never,” I replied, “thou
wondrous pattern of all earthly perfection! never, until death shall
divide us! By this ambrosial kiss, a thousand times more fragrant than
the breeze that sweeps the orange grove, I never more will leave thee!”

As my first transport abated, my passion grew turbulent and unruly. I
was giddy with standing on the brink of bliss, and all my virtue and
philosophy were scarce sufficient to restrain the inordinate sallies of
desire. Narcissa perceived the conflict within me, and with her usual
dignity of prudence, called off my imagination from the object in view,
and with eager expressions of interested curiosity, desired to know the
particulars of my voyage. In this I gratified her inclination, bringing
my story down to the present hour. She was infinitely surprised at the
circumstance of finding my father, which brought tears into her lovely
eyes. She was transported at hearing that approved of my flame,
discovered a longing desire of being introduced to him, congratulated
herself and me upon my good fortune, and observed, that this great and
unexpected stroke of fate seemed to have been brought about by the
immediate direction of Providence. Having entertained ourselves some
hours with the genuine effusions of our souls, I obtained her consent
to complete my happiness as soon as my father should judge it proper;
and, applying with my own hands a valuable necklace, composed of
diamonds and amethysts set alternately, which an old Spanish lady at
Paraguay had presented me with, I took my leave, promising to return in
the afternoon with Don Rodrigo. When I went home, this generous parent
inquired very affectionately about the health of my dear Narcissa, to
whom, that I might be the more agreeable, he put into my hand a deed,
by which I found myself in possession of fifteen thousand pounds,
exclusive of the profits of my own merchandise, which amounted to three
thousand more. After dinner I accompanied him to the lodgings of my
mistress, who, being dressed for the occasion, made a most dazzling
appearance. I could perceive him struck with her figure, which I really
think was the most beautiful that ever was created under the sun. He
embraced her tenderly, and told her he was proud of having a son who
had spirit to attempt, and qualifications to engage the affections of
such a fine lady. She blushed at this compliment, and, with eyes full
of the softest languishment turned upon me, said, she should have been
unworthy of Mr. Random’s attention, had she been blind to his
extraordinary merit. I made no other answer than a low bow. My father,
sighing, pronounced, “Such was once my Charlotte;” while the tear
rushed into his eye, and the tender heart of Narcissa manifested itself
in two precious drops of sympathy, which, but for his presence, I would
have kissed away. Without repeating the particulars of our
conversation, I shall only observe, that Don Rodrigo was as much
charmed with her good sense as with her appearance, and she was no less
pleased with his understanding and polite address. It was determined
that he should write to the squire, signifying his approbation of my
passion for his sister, and offering a settlement, which he should have
no reason to reject; and that, if he should refuse the proposal, we
would crown our mutual wishes without any further regard to his will.




CHAPTER LXVIII


My Father makes a present to Narcissa—the Letter is dispatched to her
Brother—I appear among my Acquaintance—Banter’s Behaviour—the Squire
refuses his Consent—my Uncle comes to Town—approves of my Choice—I am
married—we meet the Squire and his Lady at the Play—our Acquaintance is
courted


After having spent the evening to the satisfaction of all present, my
father addressed himself thus to Narcissa. “Madam, give me leave to
consider you hereafter as my daughter, in which capacity I insist upon
your accepting this first instance of my paternal duty and affection.”
With these words he put into her hand a bank note of five hundred
pounds, which she no sooner examined, than with a low courtesy she
replied. “Dear sir, though I have not the least occasion for this
supply, I have too great a veneration for you to refuse this proof of
your generosity and esteem, which I the more freely receive, because I
already look upon Mr. Random’s interest as inseparably connected with
mine.” He was extremely well pleased with her frank and ingenuous
reply, upon which we saluted, and wished her good night. The letter, at
my request, was dispatched to Sussex by an express, and in the
meantime, Don Rodrigo, to grace my nuptials, hired a ready furnished
house, and set up a very handsome equipage.

Though I passed the greatest part of the day with the darling of my
soul, I found leisure sometimes to be among my former acquaintance, who
were astonished at the magnificence of my appearance. Banter in
particular was confounded at the vicissitudes of my fortune, the causes
of which he endeavoured in vain to discover, until I thought fit to
disclose the whole secret of my last voyage, partly in consideration of
our former intimacy, and partly to prevent unfavourable conjectures,
which he and others, in all probability, would have made in regard to
my circumstances. He professed great satisfaction at this piece of
news; and I had no cause to believe him insincere, when I considered
that he would now look upon himself as acquitted of the debt he owed
me, and at the same time flatter himself with the hopes of borrowing
more. I carried him home to dinner with me, and my father liked his
conversation so much, that, upon hearing his difficulties, he desired
me to accommodate him for the present, and inquire, if he would accept
of a commission in the army, towards the purchase of which he should
willingly lend him money. Accordingly, I gave my friend an opportunity
of being alone with me, when, as I expected, he told me that he was
just on the point of being reconciled to an old rich uncle, whose heir
he was, but wanted a few pieces for immediate expense, which he desired
I would lend him and take my bond for the whole. His demand was limited
to ten guineas; and when I put twenty in his hand, he stared at me for
some moments; then, putting it into his purse, “Ay,—’tis all one—you
shall have the whole in a very short time.” When I had taken his note,
to save the expense of a bond, I expressed some surprise that a fellow
of his spirit should loiter away his time in idleness, and, asked why
he did not choose to make his fortune in the army. “What,” said he,
“throw away money upon a subaltern’s commission, and be under the
command of a parcel of scoundrels, who have raised themselves above me
by the most infamous practices. No, I love independency too well to
sacrifice my life, health, and pleasure, for such a pitiful
consideration.” Finding him adverse to this way of life, I changed the
subject, and returned to Don Rodrigo, who had just received the
following epistle from the squire:

“Sir,—Concerning a letter which I received, subscribed R. Random, this
is the answer. As for you, I know nothing of you. Your son, or
pretended son, I have seen; if he marries my sister, at his peril be
it; I do declare that he shall not have one farthing of her fortune,
which becomes my property, if she takes a husband without my consent.
Your settlement, I do believe, is all a sham, and yourself no better
than you should be; but if you had all the wealth of the Indies, your
son shall never match in our family with the consent of
    “Orson Topehall”


My father was not much surprised at this polite letter, after having
heard the character of the author; and as for me, I was even pleased at
his refusal, because I had now an opportunity of showing my
disinterested love. By his permission I waited on my charmer: and
having imparted the contents of her brother’s letter, at which she wept
bitterly, in spite of all my consolation and caresses, the time of our
marriage was fixed two days. During this interval, in which my soul was
wound up to the last stretch of rapturous expectation, Narcissa
endeavoured to reconcile some of her relations in town to her marriage
with me; but, finding them all deaf to her remonstrances, either out of
envy or prejudice, she told me with the most enchanting sweetness,
while the tears bedewed her lovely cheeks, “Sure the world will no
longer question your generosity when you take a poor forlorn beggar to
your arms?” Affected with her sorrow, I pressed the fair mourner to my
breast, and swore that she was more dear and welcome on that account,
because she had sacrificed her friends and fortune to her love for me.
My uncle, for whose character she had a great veneration, being by this
time come to town, I introduced him to my bride; and, although he was
not very much subject to refined sensations, he was struck dumb with
admiration at her beauty. After having kissed and gazed at her for some
time, he turned to me, saying. “Odds bobs, Rory! a notable prize
indeed, finely built and gloriously rigged, i’faith! If she an’t well
manned when you take the command of her, sirrah, you deserve to go to
sea in a cockle shell. No offence, I hope, niece! you must not mind
what I say, being (as the saying is) a plain seafaring man, though
mayhap I have as much regard for you as another.” She received him with
great civility, told him she had longed a great while to see a person
to whom she was so much indebted for his generosity to Mr. Random; that
she looked upon him as her uncle, by which name she begged leave to
call him for the future; and that she was very sure he could say
nothing that would give her the least offence. The honest captain was
transported at her courteous behaviour, and insisted upon giving her
away at the ceremony, swearing that he loved her as well as if she was
his own child, and that he would give two thousand guineas to the first
fruit of our love, as soon as it would squeak. Everything being settled
for the solemnisation of our nuptials, which were to be performed
privately at my father’s house, the auspicious hour arrived, when Don
Rodrigo and my uncle went in the coach to fetch the bride and Miss
Williams: leaving me with a parson, Banter, and Strap, neither of whom
had as yet seen my charming mistress. My faithful valet, who was on the
rack of impatience to behold a lady of whom he had heard so much, no
sooner understood that the coach was returned, than he placed himself
at a window, to have a peep at her as she alighted; and, when he saw
her, clapped his hands together, turned up the white of his eyes, and,
with his mouth wide open, remained in a sort of ecstacy, which broke
out into “O Dea certe! qualis in Eurotae ripis, aut per iuga Cynthi
exercet Diana choros?” The doctor and Banter were surprised to hear my
man speak Latin; but when my father led Narcissa into the room, the
object of their admiration was soon changed, as appeared in the
countenances of both. Indeed, they must have been the most insensible
of all beings, could they have beheld without emotion the divine
creature that approached! She was dressed in a sack of white satin,
embroidered on the breast with gold, the crown of her head was covered
with a small French cap, from whence descended her beautiful hair in
ringlets that waved upon her snowy neck, which dignified the necklace I
had given her; her looks glowed with modesty and love; and her bosom,
through the veil of gauze that shaded it, afforded a prospect of
Elysium! I received this inestimable gift of Providence as became me;
and in a little time the clergyman did his office, my uncle, at his own
earnest request, acting the part of a father to my dear Narcissa, who
trembled very much, and had scarce spirits sufficient to support her
under this great change of situation. Soon as she was mine by the laws
or heaven and earth, I printed a burning kiss upon her lips; my father
embraced her tenderly, my uncle hugged her with great affection, and I
presented her to my friend Banter, who saluted her in a very polite
manner; Miss Williams hung round her neck, and went plentifully; while
Strap fell upon his knees, and begged to kiss his lady’s hand, which
she presented with great affability. I shall not pretend to describe my
own feelings at this juncture; let it suffice to say that having supped
and entertained ourselves till ten o’clock, I cautioned my Narcissa
against exposing her health by sitting up too late, and she was
prevailed upon to withdraw with her maid to an apartment destined for
us. When she left the room, her face overspread with a blush that set
all my blood in a state of fermentation, and made every pulse beat with
tenfold vigour! She was so cruel as to let me remain in this condition
a full half-hour: when, no longer able to restrain my impatience, I
broke from the company, burst into her chamber, pushed out her
confidante, and locked the door, and found her—O heaven and earth!—a
feast a thousand times more delicious than my most sanguine hopes
presaged! But, let me not profane the chaste mysteries of Hymen. I was
the happiest of men!

In the morning I was awaked by three or four drums, which Banter had
placed under the window; upon which I withdrew the curtain, and enjoyed
the unspeakable satisfaction of contemplating those angelic charms
which were now in my possession! Beauty! which, whether sleeping or
awake, shot forth peculiar graces! The light darting upon my Narcissa’s
eyes, she awoke also, and recollecting her situation, hid her blushes
in my bosom. I was distracted with joy! I could not believe the
evidence of my senses, and looked upon all that had happened as the
fictions of a dream! In the meantime my uncle knocked at the door, and
bade me turn out, for I had had a long spell. I rose accordingly, and
sent Miss Williams to her mistress, myself receiving the congratulation
of Captain Bowling, who rallied me in his sea phrase with great
success. In less than an hour, Don Rodrigo led my wife into breakfast,
where she received the compliments of the company on her looks, which,
they said, if possible, were improved by matrimony. As her delicate
ears were offended with none of those indecent ambiguities which are
too often spoken on such occasions, she behaved with dignity,
unaffected modesty, and ease; and, as a testimony of my affection and
esteem, I presented her, in presence of them all, with a deed, by which
I settled the whole fortune I was possessed of on her and her heirs for
ever. She accepted it with a glance of most tender acknowledgment,
observed, that she could not be surprised at anything of this kind I
should do, and desired my father to take the trouble of keeping it,
saying, “Next to my own Mr. Random, you are the person in whom I ought
to have the greatest confidence.” Charmed with her prudent and
ingenuous manner of proceeding, he took the paper, and assured her that
it should not lose its value while in his custody.

As we had not many visits to give and receive, the little time we
stayed in town was spent in going to public diversions, where I have
the vanity to think Narcissa was seldom eclipsed. One night, in
particular, we sent our footman to keep one of the stage boxes, which
we no sooner entered, than we perceived in the opposite box the squire
and his lady, who seemed not a little surprised at seeing us. I was
pleased at this opportunity of confronting them; the more, because
Melinda was robbed of all her admirers by my wife, who happened that
night to outshine her sister both in beauty and dress. She was piqued
at Narcissa’s victory, tossed her head a thousand different ways,
flirted her fan, looked at us with disdain, then whispered to her
husband, and broke out into an affected giggle; but all her arts proved
ineffectual, either to discompose Mrs. Random, or to conceal her own
mortification, which at length forced her away long before the play was
done. The news of our marriage being spread, with many circumstances to
our disadvantage, by the industry of this malignant creature, a certain
set of persons fond of scandal began to inquire into the particulars of
my fortune, which they no sooner understood to be independent, than the
tables were turned, and our acquaintance was courted as much as it had
been despised before: but she had too much dignity of pride to
encourage this change of conduct, especially in her relations, whom she
could never be prevailed upon to see, after the malicious reports they
had raised to her prejudice.




CHAPTER LXIX


My father intends to revisit the Place of his Nativity—we propose to
accompany him—my Uncle renews his will in my favour, determining to go
to sea again—we set out for Scotland—arrive at Edinburgh—purchase our
paternal Estate—proceed to it—halt at the Town where I was
educated—take up my bond to Crab—the Behaviour of Potion and his Wife,
and one of our Female Cousins—our Reception at the Estate—Strap marries
Miss Williams, and is settled by my Father to his own satisfaction—I am
more and more happy.


My father intending to revisit his native country, and pay the tribute
of a few tears at my mother’s grave, Narcissa and I resolved to
accompany him in the execution of his pious office, and accordingly
prepared for the journey, in which, however, my uncle would not engage,
being resolved to try his fortune once more at sea. In the meantime he
renewed his will in favour of my wife and me, and deposited it in the
hands of his brother-in-law: while I (that I might not be wanting to my
own interest) summoned the squire to produce his father’s will at
Doctors’ Commons, and employed a proctor to manage the affair in my
absence.

Everything being thus settled, we took leave of all our friends in
London, and set out for Scotland, Don Rodrigo, Narcissa, Miss Williams,
and I, in the coach, and Strap, with two men in livery, on horseback;
as we made easy stages, my charmer held it out very well, till we
arrived at Edinburgh, where we proposed to rest ourselves some weeks.

Here Don Rodrigo having intelligence that the foxhunter had spoilt his
estate, which was to be exposed to sale by public auction, he
determined to make a purchase of the spot where he was born, and
actually bought all the land that belonged to his father.

In a few days after this bargain was made, we left Edinburgh, in order
to go and take possession; and by the way halted one night in that town
where I was educated. Upon inquiry, I found that Mr. Crab was dead;
whereupon I sent for his executor, paid the sum I owed with interest,
and took up my bond. Mr. Potion and his wife, hearing of my arrival,
had the assurance to come to the inn where we lodged, and send up their
names, with the desire of being permitted to pay their respects to my
father and me: but their sordid behaviour towards me, when I was an
orphan, had made too deep an impression on my mind to be effaced by
this mean mercenary piece of condescension: I therefore rejected their
message with disdain, and bade Strap tell them, that my father and I
desired to have no communication with such low-minded wretches as they
were.

They had not been gone half-an-hour, when a woman, without any
ceremony, opened the door of the room where we sat, and, making towards
my father, accosted him with, “Uncle, your servant—I am glad to see
you.” This was no other than one of my female cousins, mentioned in the
first part of my memoirs, to whom Don Rodrigo replied, “Pray, who are
you, madam?” “Oh!” cried she, “my cousin Rory there knows me very well.
Don’t you remember me, Rory?” “Yes, madam,” said I; “for my own part, I
shall never forget you. Sir, this is one of the young ladies, who (as I
have formerly told you) treated me so humanely in my childhood!” When I
pronounced these words, my father’s resentment glowed in his visage,
and he ordered her to be gone, with such a commanding aspect, that she
retired in a fright, muttering curses as she went downstairs. We
afterwards learned that she was married to an ensign, who had already
spent all her fortune; and that her sister had borne a child to her
mother’s footman, who is now her husband, and keeps a petty alehouse in
the country.

The fame of our flourishing condition having arrived at this place
before us, we got notice that the magistrates intended next day to
compliment us with the freedom of their town; upon which my father,
considering their complaisance in the right point of view, ordered the
horses to the coach early in the morning.

We proceeded to our estate, which lay about twenty miles from this
place; and, when we came within half-a-league of the house, were met by
a prodigious number of poor tenants, men, women, and children, who
testified their joy by loud acclamations, and accompanied our coach to
the gate. As there is no part of the world in which the peasants are
more attached to their lords than in Scotland, we were almost devoured
by their affections. My father had always been their favourite, and now
that he appeared their master, after having been thought dead so long,
their joy broke out into a thousand extravagances. When we entered the
court yard, we were surrounded by a vast number, who crowded together
so closely to see us that several were in danger of being squeezed to
death; those who were near Don Rodrigo fell upon their knees, and
kissed his hand, or the hem of his garment, praying aloud for long life
and prosperity to him; others approached Narcissa and me in the same
manner; while the rest clapped their hands at a distance, and invoked
heaven to shower its choicest blessings on our heads! In short, the
whole scene, though rude, was so affecting, that the gentle partner of
my heart wept over it, and my father himself could not refrain from
dropping a tear.

Having welcomed his daughter and me to his house, he ordered some
bullocks to be killed, and some hogsheads of ale to be brought from the
neighbouring village, to regale these honest people, who had not
enjoyed such a holiday for many years before.

Next day we were visited by the gentlemen in the neighbourhood, most of
them our relations, one of whom brought along my cousin, the foxhunter,
who had stayed at his house since he was obliged to leave his own! My
father was generous enough to receive him kindly, and even promised to
purchase for him a commission in the army, for which he expressed great
thankfulness and joy.

My charming Narcissa was universally admired and loved for her beauty,
affability, and good sense; and so well pleased with the situation of
the place, and the company round, that she has not as yet discovered
the least desire of changing her habitation.

We had not been many days settled, when I prevailed upon my father to
pay a visit to the village where I had been at school. Here we were
received by the principal inhabitants, who entertained us in the
church, where Mr. Syntax the schoolmaster (my tyrant being dead)
pronounced a Latin oration in honour of our family. And none exerted
themselves more than Strap’s father and relations, who looked upon the
honest valet as the first gentleman of their race, and honoured his
benefactors accordingly. Having received the homage of this place, we
retired, leaving forty pounds for the benefit of the poor of the
parish; and that very night, Strap being a little elevated with the
regard that had been shown to him, and to me on his account, ventured
to tell me, that he had a sneaking kindness for Miss Williams, and
that, if his lady and I would use our interest in his behalf, he did
not doubt that she would listen to his addresses. Surprised at this
proposal, I asked if he knew the story of that unfortunate young
gentlewoman; upon which he replied, “Yes, yes, I know what you mean—she
has been unhappy, I grant you—but what of that? I am convinced of her
reformation; or else you and my good lady would not treat her with such
respect. As for the censure of the world, I value it not a fig’s
end—besides, the world knows nothing of the matter.” I commended his
philosophy, and interested Narcissa in his cause; who interceded so
effectually, that in a little time Miss Williams yielded her consent,
and they were married at the approbation of Don Rodrigo, who gave him
five hundred pounds to stock a farm, and made him overseer of his
estate. My generous bedfellow gave her maid the same sum; so that they
live in great peace and plenty within half-a-mile of us, and daily put
up prayers for our preservation.

If there be such a thing as true happiness on earth, I enjoy it. The
impetuous transports of my passion are now settled and mellowed into
endearing fondness and tranquillity of love, rooted by that intimate
connection and interchange of hearts which nought but virtuous wedlock
can produce. Fortune seems determined to make ample amends for her
former cruelty, for my proctor writes that, notwithstanding the clause
in my father-in-law’s will, on which the squire founds his claim, I
shall certainly recover my wife’s fortune, in consequence of a codicil
annexed, which explains that clause, and limits her restriction to the
age of nineteen, after which she was at her own disposal. I would have
set out for London immediately after receiving this piece of
intelligence, but my dear angel has been qualmish of late, and begins
to grow remarkably round in the waist; so that I cannot leave her in
such an interesting situation, which I hope will produce something to
crown my felicity.






*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ADVENTURES OF RODERICK RANDOM ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


